[The evaluation of the effectiveness of electrophoresis in the form of Polymineral wipes on the basis of iodine- bromine natural water in the young children suffering from the consequences of perinatal lesions in the central nervous system].
UNLABELLED
The background: the increased frequency of serious consequences of perinatal lesions in the central nervous system of the young children dictates the necessity to develop the effective methods of physiotherapy for the early-stage rehabilitation of such patients on the basis of an objective assessment of the adaptive reserves of the organism.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The present study involved 53 children at the age from 1 to 12 months presenting with the consequences of perinatal lesions to the central nervous system.  Thirty of the children were treated with the use of electrophoresis in the form of Polymineral wipes on the basis of natural iodine-bromine water.
The group of comparison was comprised of 23 children treated without physiotherapy.
We estimated the clinical effectiveness and the level of adaptive resources based on the results of blood count measurements (the type of non-specific adaptive reaction and the reactivity level); in addition, the electro-acupuncture test was carried out with the use of the hardware-software complex for bioresonance (MOR) therapy.
RESULTS  The clinical effectiveness of an electrophoresis in the form of Polymineral wipes on the basis of natural iodine-bromine water used for the treatment of the newborn infants with the consequences of perinatal lesions to the central nervous system amounted to 93.3%.
The rearrangement of the adaptive reactions was apparent as the increase in the proportion of the antistress reactions from 63.3% to 86.7%, the decrease in the frequency of the reactivation reaction by a factor of 3.7, and the reduction of the reactivity level by a factor of 3.0.
The repeated study with the use of the MORA-test revealed normalization of the altered indicators in all the children with the initially reduced or enhanced values of these indicators.  In the comparison group, dynamics of clinical symptoms was less apparent, and the assessment of the adaptative resources revealed their decrease in 78.3% of the cases.
CONCLUSION
The present study confirmed the beneficial effect of electrophoresis in the form of Polymineral wipes on the basis of natural iodine-bromine natural water on the dynamics of clinical symptoms and adaptive reserves in the infants suffering from the consequences of perinatal lesions to the central nervous system.
The determination of the type of the nonspecific adaptive reaction and the level of reactivity in combination with the MORA-test can be a method for the assessment of the effectiveness and adequacy of physiotherapeutic modalities for the young children.
