[Glioblastoma metastases: a literature review and a description of six clinical observations].  INTRODUCTION
since the 1990s, the literature has described cases of glioblastoma metastases with the development of foci located at a distance from the primary tumor.
However, the pathogenesis of this process remains unclear until the end.  This focus is believed to result, on the one hand, from tumor metastasis from the primary site and, on the other hand, from multifocal growth.
This article presents a literature review and a description of clinical observations of patients with glioblastoma metastases.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 6 patients (1 female and 5 males) with brain glioblastomas who received treatment at the Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute (5 patients) and the Department of Neurosurgery of the Research Center of Neurology (1 patient) in the period from 2010 to 2014.
Neurophysiological control was used if the tumor was localized near the eloquent cortical areas and pathways; 4 of 6 patients were operated on using the methods of intraoperative fluorescence diagnosis (5-ALA agent--Alasens).
RESULTS
Four patients had metastases within one hemisphere, two had metastases in the contralateral hemisphere in the period of 5 to 18 months after the first operation.
The primary tumor site was located near the ventricular system in two patients.
In one patient, the lateral ventricle was opened during the first operation.  In another patient, the prepontine cistern was opened during the first operation.
In two patients, the primary tumor site was located at a distance from the lateral ventricles, however, the tumor was located near them during recurrence.  Based on metabolic navigation, fluorescence of the tumor was observed in the four patients during both the first and repeated operations.
CONCLUSIONS
The close relationship between primary glioblastomas and metastases and the cerebrospinal fluid circulation pathways may confirm the fact of dissemination of tumor cells with cerebrospinal fluid flow.
In our opinion, there should be an increased suspicion of the possibility for metastases of glioblastomas that are closely associated with the cerebrospinal fluid circulation pathways.
Metabolic navigation with 5-ALA is effective both during primary surgery in patients with glioblastomas and during resection of glioblastoma metastases.
