[Analysis of the state-of-the-art of consulting medical care to patients with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis or its risk according to the data of a questionnaire survey (GLUCOST study)].  AIM
To analyze the state-of-the-art of consulting medical care to Russian patients with glucocorticoid-induced osteoporosis (GCOP) or its risk.  SUBJECTS AND METHODS
This GLUCOST study was organized and conducted by the Russian Association of Osteoporosis.  A total of 1129 patients with chronic inflammatory diseases, who had been taking oral glucocorticosteroids (OGCSs) a long time (3 months or more), were examined.
The patients filled out an anonymous questionnaire on their own.
Whether the measures taken to diagnose, prevent, and treat GCOP complied with the main points of Russian clinical guidelines was assessed.
RESULTS
61.8% of the patients knew that the long-term treatment of GCOP might cause osteoporosis.
48.1% of the respondents confirmed the results of bone densitometry; 78.1% of the patients reported that they had been prescribed calcium and vitamin D supplements by their physician, but their regular intake was confirmed by only 43.4%; 25.4% of the patients had sustained one low-energy fracture or more.
Treatment for GCOP was prescribed for 50.8% of the patients at high risk for fractures, but was actually received by 40.2%.
Therapeutic and diagnostic measures were implemented in men less frequently than in women.
When the patient was aware of GCOP, the probability that he/she would take calcium and vitamin D supplements rose 2.7-fold (95% Cl; 2.1 to 3.5; p = 0.001) and that he/she would follow treatment recommendations did 3.5-fold (95% Cl; 2.3 to 5.3; p = 0.001).
Bone densitometry increased the prescription rate for antiosteoporotic medication and patient compliance.
CONCLUSION
According to the data of Russia's large-scale GLUCOST survey, every four patients with chronic inflammatory disease who are on long-term OGCS therapy have one low-energy fracture or more.
Due to inadequate counseling, the patients are little aware of their health and do not get the care required to prevent the disease.
Less than 50% of patients who have GCOP and a high risk for fractures undergo examination and necessary treatment aimed at preventing fractures.
