[Variants of changes in the psychopathological phenomenology of the long-term remission in stable patients with attack-like progressive form of schizophrenia: a longitudinal study].  AIM
An analysis of literature data on schizophrenia shows the change of interest from acute psychosis to phenomenology of remission.  The separate objects of research become the impact of symptoms, observed in remission, on everyday life of patients and factors, which influence rapidity and comprehension of reintegration of patients into society.
Authors aimed to describe the changes in psychopathological phenomenology and personality functioning during long-term (no less than three years) remission in patients with schizophrenia treated with atypical antipsychotics.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
One hundred and thirty stable patients with schizophrenia underwent regular clinical examination during no less than three years.  All patients were constantly medicated with atypical antipsychotics.
RESULTS
Long-term observation of patients with the similar diagnosis and phase of disease, similar treatment and good treatment response (at least without psychotic exacerbation during the observation period) and tolerability revealed difference in changes of psychopathological phenomenology and personality functioning, which could be grouped into four distinct variants.  The description of specificity of each variant is presented.
A role of the initial level of personality functioning and its changes during observation period were analyzed.  A new concept is introduced in order to name the ability of patients to use rationally recourses, delivered by treatment.
The connection of this concept with the level of personality functioning was demonstrated.  The hypothesis of mechanisms which underlie the four variants is offered.
CONCLUSION  Long-term observation of the changes in the psychopathological phenomenology in the period of disease reveals the variants of the development of remission.
The fluctuation of adaptive and regressive phases is registered.
More objective factors, which impact on prognosis, are elucidated.
