UNLABELLED  Despite the obvious progress in modern neurosurgery, surgery for glial tumors of the insular lobe is often associated with a high risk of postoperative neurological deficit, which is primarily caused by damage to perforating arteries of the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery.
OBJECTIVE
The work is aimed at evaluating the effectiveness of high resolution time-of-flight (3D-TOF) MR angiography in imaging of medial and lateral lenticulostriate arteries and determining their relationship to tumor edge in patients with gliomas of the insula.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
3D-TOF MR angiography data were analyzed in 20 patients with primarily diagnosed cerebral gliomas involving the insula.  All patients underwent non-contrast enhanced 3D-TOF MR angiography.
In 6 cases, 3D-TOF MRA was performed before and after contrast enhancement.  RESULTS
3D-TOF angiography before intravenous contrast injection was capable of visualizing the medial lenticulostriate arteries in 19 patients (95% of all cases) and lateral lenticulostriate arteries in 18 patients (90% of all cases).
Contrast-enhanced 3D-TOF angiography allows for better visualization of both the proximal and distal segments of lenticulostriate arteries.  Three variants of relationship between the tumor and lenticulostriate arteries were identified.
Variant I: the tumor grew over the arteries without their displacement in 2 cases (10% of the total number of observations); variant II: the tumor caused medial displacement of arteries without growing over them in 11 cases (55% of the total number of observations); variant III: the tumor partially grew over and displaced arteries in 2 cases (10%).
In 25% of cases (5 patients), tumor was poorly visualized on 3D-TOF MR angiograms because their signal characteristics did not differ from those of the medulla (tumor tissue was T1 isointense).  As a result, it was impossible to determine the relationship between the tumor and lenticulostriate arteries.
CONCLUSION
High spatial resolution time-of-flight MR angiography can be recommended for preoperative imaging of lenticulostriate arteries to plan the extent of neurosurgical resection in patients with glial tumors of the insular lobe.
