AIM  The article is aimed to demonstrate our experience in motor cortex stimulation (MCS) in patients with chronic neuropathic pain syndromes, assess the clinical efficacy of the technique in short-term and long-term follow-up, and analyze potential predictors of the MCS efficacy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Twenty patients were implanted with MCS electrodes at the Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute in the period between 2004 and 2014.
The mean age of patients was 52 years (26 to 74 years).  The patients suffered from neuropathic pain syndromes of different genesis (post-stroke, multiple sclerosis, atypical facial pain, phantom limb pain, brachial plexus injury, spinal cord injury, complex regional pain syndrome I).
All patients underwent neurological examination with verification of neuropathic pain (DN4, Pain Detect, LANSS).
The pain intensity and its effect on quality of life were assessed before operation and during follow-up according to 10-point visual-analog scales (modified Brief Pain Inventory).
Before surgery, all patients underwent several repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) sessions.
After implantation of epidural electrodes, test MCS was performed.
RESULTS
Test stimulation was positive in 19 (95%) patients.
All these patients were implanted with a chronic MCS system.
The mean follow-up was 49.3 months (from 3 to 96 months).
In short-term follow-up (fist 6 months), a positive result of MCS was observed in 17 patients, and a reduction in the pain intensity ranged from 37.5% to 90%.  In long-term follow up (from 12 to 96 months), 14 patients had positive MCS RESULTS: and a reduction in the pain intensity amounted to 25% to 60%.
All patients with positive MCS results received significantly decreased doses of opioids and tramadol.
Two patients developed infectious complications, but there was no neurological deficit.
Analysis of the factors affecting the efficacy of motor cortex stimulation did not reveal a statistically significant effect of rTMS and the presence and intensity of motor deficit.
CONCLUSION
Chronic epidural MCS is an effective and safety method for the treatment of some chronic neurogenic medically-refractory pain syndromes.
Further research is necessary to specify the patient selection criteria and the MCS efficacy predictors.
