[Treatment motivation in patients with chronic cardiorenal syndrome].
AIM  To study treatment motivation in patients with chronic heart failure (CHF) and in those with CHF concurrent with chronic kidney disease (CKD).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
A total of 203 patients (130 men and 73 women; mean age, 61.8±9.6 years) with CHF diagnosed and assessed in accordance with the National Guidelines of the All-Russian Research Society of Cardiology and the Heart Failure Society for the diagnosis and treatment of CHF (third edition, 2009) were examined.
CKD was diagnosed according to the 2012 National Guidelines of the Research Nephrology Society of Russia.
A group of patients with chronic cardiorenal syndrome (CRS) included those with CHF and CKD with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of <60 ml/min/1.73 m2.
The clinical course of CHF, personality profile, and motivation for non-drug and drug treatments were assessed in patients with chronic CRS.
RESULTS
CFR was 67.7±17.2 ml/min/1.73 m2; chronic CRS was observed in 89 (44%) patients.
Psychological functioning assessment showed that the patients with chronic CRS as compared with those with CHF without CKD had high anxiety and maladaptive disease attitudes.
CHF treatment motivation (compliance with lifestyle modification and medication) was proved inadequate and detected only in 31 (15.3%) patients with CHF regardless of the presence of CKD.
The specific features of psychological functioning, which affected treatment motivation, were seen in patients with chronic CRS: those who were lowly motivated had a euphoric attitude towards their disease (p=0.03); those who were satisfactorily motivated showed an emotive accentuation of character (p=0.002).
CONCLUSION
The presence of CKD aggravates the clinical course of CHF and negatively affects the psychological functioning of patients with CHF.
The patients with chronic CRS are characterized by a low level of motivation for both drug and non-drug treatments, which should be taken into account when managing this cohort of patients.
