[Clinical and pathopsychological aspects of forming negative disorders in remissions of shift-like schizophrenia treated with different generations of neuroleptics].
OBJECTIVE
To determine clinical and pathopsychological parameters of negative personality changes, their diagnostic and predictive significance based on the variant of neuroleptic treatment in the dynamics of remissions in shift-like schizophrenia.
MATERIAL AND METHODS  Twenty-nine female patients diagnosed with ICD-10 schizophrenia (items F20.01 and F20.02) were examined.
The patients were treated with typical neuroleptics (TN) or atypical (ATN) neuroleptics in the hospital and then as outpatients.
Patient's state was assessed clinically and psychometrically with the PANSS at admission, at the beginning of remission and after one and two years of remission.  Mean score of positive (PS) and negative (NS) symptoms was determined differentially in the dynamics basing on the neuroleptic used.
Twenty-seven patients underwent experimental/pathopsychological examination.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION
In different stages of the dynamics of shift-like schizophrenia, NS had different capacity of «reversibility» and were distinctly associated with the illness-shaping influence of PS severity and activity and characteristics of psychotropic effect of the neuroleptics.
The highest severity of NS was noted in the stage of active psychosis (up to 3.6 and 4.2 scores), with the following decrease in the beginning of remission (up to 2.3 and 2.8 scores).
The most distinct trend towards the reduction of NS in the first and second years of remission (up to 2.0-1.0 scores), along with a trend to the complete reduction of PS, was identified in patients treated with ATN.
In patients treated with TN, the severity of NS was relatively stable in all stages of remission, with a trend towards the increased severity (up to 2.8 and 3.2 scores) with the stable reduction of PS to1.6 scores.
The distinct property of ATN to exert the reducing psychotropic effect on NS and the lack of antinegative effect in the antipsychotic spectrum of TN is discussed.
