[Results of surgical treatment of syringomyelia associated with Chiari 1 malformation.  An analysis of 125 cases].  UNLABELLED  The rate of Chiari malformation (CM) in a population ranges from 3 to 8 per 100,000 population.
In 62-80% of cases, CM is accompanied by the development of syringomyelia (SM) at various levels.
The clinical picture in these patients is a combination of CM and SM manifestations; however, SM symptoms often prevail, which creates some problems in the diagnosis of the disease and in the choice of optimal treatment.  OBJECTIVE
On the basis of our own experience of surgical interventions, we aimed to clarify the indications for surgical treatment of SM associated with CM and to determine the optimal amount of surgery and the criteria for evaluation of treatment outcomes.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Two hundred twenty five patients with a combination of syringomyelia and Chiari 1 malformation were examined in the period from 2011 to February 2015.  Of them, 125 patients were operated on.
The mean age of the operated patients was 56±8 years.  The mean time from the appearance of the first signs of the disease to surgery was 75±82 months.
All operations were performed by a single surgeon.
The operations were carried out in the half-sitting (89.6%) or prone (10.4%) position.  The operation included sparing suboccipital craniectomy, C1 arch resection, recovery of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) circulation along the posterior surface of the cerebellum, and reconstruction of the dura mater in the craniovertebral junction region.
RESULTS
Exploration of the arachnoid mater of the cisterna magna after dura opening revealed no arachnopathy in 78 (62.4%) patients (Chiari 0 malformation according to Klekamp).
The type 1 arachnopathy (by Klekamp) was detected in 31 patients (24.8%), and the type 2 arachnopathy was observed in 16 (12.8%).
The condition of 109 (88%) patients was evaluated one year after the surgery.
Sixty one (56%) patients had partial or complete regression of preoperative neurological symptoms.  The disease stopped progressing in 44 patients (40%).
The disease was progressing in 4 (3.7%) patients.
No recurrence of a CSF circulation disturbance at the craniovertebral level was observed during follow-up.
Early postoperative complications occurred in 4 (3.2%) patients: wound CSF leakage in 1 (0.8%) patient, acute epidural hematoma in 1 (0.8%) patient, and aseptic meningitis in 2 (1.6%) patients.
Temporary deteriorations in the condition (headache worsening, meteosensitivity) were detected in 11 (8.9%) patients.
These symptoms regressed by the end of the 1st postoperative month.
There were no deaths.
CONCLUSIONS
The indication for surgery in patients with a combination of CM and SM is the presence of neurological symptoms associated with syringomyelia and their progression as well as headache caused by herniation of the cerebellar tonsils, which significantly deteriorates the patient's quality of life.
The main criteria for evaluating the efficacy of treatment include stabilization of the clinical symptoms and/or improvement in the patient condition.
Suboccipital craniectomy followed by reconstruction of the dura mater and recovery of the CSF circulation in the craniovertebral region is an effective treatment of syringomyelia associated with Chiari 1 malformation.
