[The development of the medical information system for the improvement of the quality of work of the Crimean spa and health resorts].  The Crimea has the enormous potential for the health promotion activities.
However, neither the profile of these activities nor the demand for the socio-medical services is clearly defined for the majority of the local spa and health resort facilities.
The possibilities of modern information technology are not used in the full measure either.  The objective of the present work was to elaborate the new medical information system and demonstrate its effectiveness.
In addition, the article describes the main advantages of the system for the optimization of healthcare in the Crimean spa and health resort facilities.
We reviewed and analyzed various literature publications, legal framework, standards, regulations, guidelines, and questionnaire survey data obtain at 50 spa and health resort facilities of the Crimea.  The results of the assessment indicate the necessity of the systematic approach to the analysis of the quality of medical care and the process of its further development.
Statistical and mathematical methods were used to elaborate the medical information system for the optimization of the activities of the Crimean spa and health resorts.  The distinctive features of the proposed information system are modularity and the possibility of flexible adjustment to the conditions of individual settings, one-step data loading with the subsequent multiple application for the formulation of documents, automated filling of records in compliance with the medical standards, and taking into consideration the possible changes in or amendments to the form of the documents.
The data obtained in the course of project implementation were used for the first time in the Republic of Crimea to design, substantiate, and recommend for the practical application the algorithm for the comprehensive estimation of the results of treatment of the patients based at the spa and health resort facilities with due regard for the specific regional conditions.
