[The formation of the self-maintenance skills in the pre-school children presenting with locomotor and coordination disorders].  UNLABELLED
The Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation acknowledges the sharp rise in the prevalence of congenital malformation in this country during the past 30 years.
In 2010-2011, this pathology was estimated to occur in 3% of the children.  It includes a variety of locomotor and coordination disorders of which the most widespread are infantile cerebral paralysis, ataxia, consequences of perinatal lesions of the central nervous system, etc.
This article contains a detailed description of these locomotor and coordination disorders.  AIM
The objective of the present work was to elaborate and evaluate the program for the formation of the self-maintenance skills in the pre-school children presenting with locomotor and coordination disorders under conditions of family guidance and education.  PATIENTS AND METHODS
The study was carried out from September 2013 till May 2014 based at MUP DOD "Semeiny klub Nadezhda" ("The Hope Family Club", Municipal unitary facility for children's additional education) and supported by B.N.
El'tsin Ural Federal University.
It included 10 children suffering from locomotor and coordination disorders of different severity and members of their families.  The following methods were used: the self-service skills scorecard , monitoring formation of the motor skills, and Wilcoxon's T-test.
RESULTS  The use of the program based on the cooperation with the children's families allowed to achieve positive dynamics in the patients' conditions.
Moreover, 30% of them acquired the full scope of the self-maintenance skills.  The most pronounced changes in the motor abilities were apparent in the movements of the upper and lower extremitis, walking, and motion in space.
CONCLUSION  The proposed program for the formation of the self-maintenance skills in the pre-school children presenting with locomotor and coordination disorders proved to be highly efficacious.
The study has demonstrated the importance of the parents' involvement in the process of formation of the self-maintenance skills and motor abilities.  It is concluded that the formation of the self-maintenance skills and locomotor abilities are two interdependent processes.
