[Uveitis: RESULTS of a prospective randomized clinical and immunological study].  AIM  to evaluate the RESULTS of a randomized prospective clinical and immunological study conducted during 2012-2014 in patients with uveitis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The main group consisted of 200 randomly selected patients with uveitis including 114 men (57%) and 86 women (42%) aged 19-57 years.
A comprehensive ophthalmic and immunological examination was performed in all patients regardless of them having a relapse or remission.
To assess patient's immune status, we investigated parameters of cellular and humoral immunity as well as complement components C3 and C4 levels.
RESULTS
Systemic connective tissue disorders appeared to be the main cause of uveitis among the patients examined - 32% of cases.
But if to consider distinct nosological entities, first place goes to herpes virus infection - 22% of cases.
In general, infectious uveitis was diagnosed in 43.5% of cases, underlying systemic conditions were found in other 46%, and finally, in some patients, uveitis was identified as posttraumatic (4.5%) or idiopathic (6%).
A total of 60.5% of patients showed clinical and functional improvement under treatment.
Irreversible blindness in 9 patients was due to one of the following: secondary glaucoma (4 cases, 2%), retinal detachment (3 cases, 1.5%), or ocular subatrophy (2 cases, 1%).
Late referral (i.e. after the development of irreversible secondary complications) should be named as one of the main causes of low vision in patients with uveitis.
As to laboratory changes, only those in cellular and congenital immunity factors were statistically significant.
CONCLUSION
In order to minimize the risk of proliferative secondary complications, a tool should be created such as a single database of uveitis patients, according to which they could be followed up.
Long-term immunosuppressive therapy for uveitis may lead to herpesvirus reactivation.
The complex nature of immune disorders justifies certain corrective measures in uvetis patients but only with account to their current immune status.
