[Centrally acting cholinomimetics in the complex therapy of progressive glaucomatous optic neuropathy].  UNLABELLED
Many factors exist that are associated with higher risk of glaucoma progression.
Arterial hypotension, low perfusion pressure, vasospastic syndrome, diabetes mellitus, myopia, etc. increase the need for neuroprotective therapy, which is aimed at stabilizing the pathological process and creating favorable conditions for maintaining visual functions.
The aim of this study was to assess the therapeutic efficacy of Gliatilin as part of the complex treatment of progressive glaucomatous optic neuropathy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
A total of 240 patients were randomly selected and divided into 2 groups, 120 patients each.
Both groups were matched for age, somatic comorbidity, and the gravity of the glaucomatous process.
Patient age averaged 71.3±1.6 years.
Advanced glaucoma prevailed in both groups: 70.0 and 76.6% correspondingly.
Neuroprotective therapy included drugs from different pharmacological classes so that different aspects of pathogenesis were addressed.
Apart from that, patients from Group I first received intravenous Gliatilin (1000 mg/4ml, 12--15 doses) and then switched to oral (1 capsule b.i.d. for 4 months).  All patients underwent standard ophthalmic examination and static perimetry.
RESULTS  No adverse effects were observed over the first two weeks of Gliatilin course, during which the patients stayed in the hospital.
IOP level was normal and stable.
Although neuroprotective therapy does not directly affect IOP, stability of the latter describes the dynamics of the glaucomatous process.
When assessing changes in visual functions, particular attention was paid to the central visual field, foveolar and total light sensitivity, peripheral visual field, and MD and PSD indices.  All mean values showed a tendency toward improvement, more pronounced in the Gliatilin group.
CONCLUSION
A complex therapy cannot be limited to a single drug only, and to make better decisions, one should consider not only ocular, but also general condition of the patient.
Adjuvant Gliatilin in the complex therapy of progressive glaucoma is appropriate and efficient, especially in case of systemic atherosclerosis and cerebrovascular insufficiency.
The frequency of stabilization therapy depends on the efficacy of the latest course and clinical manifestations of the glaucomatous process.
