[The influence of chronomagnetic therapy on the parameters of the quality of life in the patients presenting with the diseases of the musculoskeletal system at the balneological and health resort-based stage of the rehabilitative treatment].  UNLABELLED
The methods for the rehabilitative treatment play an important role in the management of the patients presenting with the diseases of the musculoskeletal system.
One of these techniques is chronomagnetic therapy.  AIM
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the influence of chronomagnetic therapy on the patient's quality of life.  PATIENTS AND METHODS
The patients of the main group included 30 ones with osteoarthrosis, 30 with rheumatoid arthritis, 20 with ankylosing spondylitis, 6 with podagric arthritis, 6 with psoriatic arthritis, and 6 others with reactive arthritis.  Each of these patients every day underwent 10 sessions of chronomagnetic therapy with the use of the Multimag apparatus («Kasimov Instrumental Plant», Ryazan).
The patients of the comparison group (20 ones presenting with osteoarthrosis, 27 with rheumatoid arthritis, 15 with ankylosing spondylitis, 4 with podagric arthritis, 4 with psoriatic arthritis, and 4 subjects with reactive arthritis) received the identical chronomagnetotherapeutic treatment under the conditions of the «Vulan» balneological health resort located at Gelendzhik, Krasnodar Region.
RESULTS
The patients of the main group presenting with osteoarthrosis were characterized by the most pronounced manifestations of the role physical and social behaviour and the associated enhancement of pain intensity.  The patients with rheumatoid arthritis exhibited well apparent manifestation of role and emotional functioning as well as enhanced vitality.
Positive dynamics of these characteristics (role physical and emotional functioning, vital activity) was documented in the patients of the comparison group presenting with osteoarthrosis, ankylosing spondylitis, and rheumatoid arthritis.
In this group, the patients with osteoarthrosis, ankylosing spondylitis, and rheumatoid arthritis experienced the improvement of the major parameters of the quality of life characterizing the physical and mental components of the health status.
CONCLUSION
The chronomagnetotherapeutic treatment at the stage of rehabilitation of the patients suffering from the diseases of the musculoskeletal system markedly improves the characteristics of physical health the disturbances of which may lead to the development of psycho-somatic disorders.
Chronomagnetic therapy of the patients with the diseases of the musculoskeletal system under the conditions of a balneological health resort proved to be more effective in terms of improvement of the parameters of physical and mental health.
The result of the subjective evaluation of the health status in such patients can be used as a marker of the effectiveness of chronomagnetic therapy and an indicator of remission of the disease.
