[N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide levels and diastolic dysfunction in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis before the administration of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs].  AIM
To determine N-terminal pro-brain natriuretic peptide (NT-proBNP) levels in patients with early rheumatoid arthritis (RA) before the use of disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs); to compare NT-proBNP values with traditional risk factors (TRF), cardiovascular diseases (CVD), inflammatory markers, and left ventricular (LV) diastolic dysfunction (DD).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
The investigation enrolled 74 patients with a valid RA diagnosis (the 2010 ACR/EULAR criteria), 56 (74%) women, median (Me) age, 54 years; disease duration, 7 months; seropositive for IgM rheumatoid factor (87%) and/or anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibodies (100%) with no history of the use of DMARDs and glucocorticosteroids.
Duplex scanning and echographic findings were used to assess TRF for CVD and carotid artery atherosclerosis (CAA) in all the patients with early RA prior to therapy.  An E/A ratio was used as a criterion for LVDD.
RESULTS  NT-proBNP concentrations in patients with early RA proved to be higher than those in the control group (p<0.0001).
Higher-than-normal NT-proBNP levels were seen in 36 (49%) patients.  The patients with early RA and elevated NT-proBNP values were older and had a higher body mass index (BMI) than those with normal NT-proBNP levels.
Those with elevated NT-proBNP concentrations were more frequently found to have CAA, coronary calcification, and coronary heart disease; their intima-media thickness was also larger and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels higher than in those with normal NT-proBNP values.  There were correlations between NT-proBNP levels and erythrocyte sedimentation rate, CRP, simplified disease activity index, and clinical disease activity index.
Multivariate analysis revealed that chronic heart failure (CHF), CAA, CRP and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) levels, and BMI correlated with NT-proBNP concentrations.  LVDD was detected in 35 (48%) patients with early RA.
The level of NT-proBNP in patients with DD was higher than in those without DD.
Higher-than-normal NT-proBNP values were observed in 23 (65%) and 12 (32%) patients with and without LVDD, respectively.
The optimal NT-proBNP level for CHF detection was equal to 237.4 pg/ml (86% sensitivity and 85% specificity); the area under the ROC curve was 0.879.
CONCLUSION
Just at the early disease stage, the patients are noted to have a high NT-proBNP level that is influenced by higher BMI, low LDL levels, CAA, CHF, and high CRP values.
In the patients with early RA, the diagnostically significant NT-proBNP concentration for CHF detection was higher (237 pg/ml) than in those without RA (125 pg/ml).
The patients with early RA should undergo NT-proBNP determination, LVDD screening, correction of TRF for CVD, atherosclerosis treatment, and remission achievement.
