[Total mesorectal excision in rectal cancer management: laparoscopic or transanal?].
AIM
To evaluate and compare intraoperative features, early surgical outcomes, quality of excised specimen after laparoscopic and transanal total mesorectal excision (LA-TME and TA-TME).
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Prospective randomized study included 45 patients with confirmed rectal adenocarcinoma (cT2-4N0-2M0) since October 2013.
LA-TME and TA-TME groups consisted of 23 and 22 patients respectively.  Inclusion criteria were patients with primary-operable rectal cancer and satisfactory response after neoadjuvant chemo- and radiotherapy.
Both groups were comparable in stages of cancer, age and body mass index (BMI).
Median length from anal edge was 6.5 cm and 7 cm in TA-TME and LA-TME groups respectively.
There was significantly greater number of patients after chemo- and radiotherapy in TA-TME group (86% vs. 48%, p=0.006).
RESULTS
Surgery time was 305 and 320 minutes in LA-TME and TA-TME groups recpectively, median blood loss -- less than 100 ml.
Mean hospital-stay was 8.0 days in both groups.  Each group had 1 conversion including laparoscopic procedure in TA-TME group.
Transanal extraction of specimen was performed in 86% vs. 48% in TA-TME and LA-TME groups respectively (p=0.021).
Complications (Clavien-Dindo sclale) were observed in 27% and 26% in TA-TME and LA-TME groups respectively without statistically significance.
Complications IIIb, IVb and V degrees were not diagnosed in TA-TME group.
Also in this group «good», «satisfactory» and «unsatisfactory» quality of TME was obtained in 68%, 14% and 18% of cases.  At the same time in LA-TME group these values were 74%, 9% and 17% respectively (p=0.859).
One of operated patients had «positive» lateral edge (TA-TME).
Median distal edge of resection was 21 mm and 23 mm in TA-TME and LA-TME groups respectively.
CONCLUSION
Preliminary data show comparable early outcomes after transanal and laparoscopic techniques.
Laparotomy and associated compications are avoided in case of transanal extraction of specimen.
Further researches are necessary to study functional and long-term results.
