[Hemispherectomy in the treatment of pediatric symptomatic epilepsy of children].
INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE
Hemispherectomy is a recognized option in the treatment of symptomatic forms of intractable focal epilepsy in patients with developmental brain malformations and some acquired lesions of one the hemispheres.
The prognosis for an outcome of the technique is important in terms of the indications for surgical treatment.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
We described the hemispherectomy technique and its variants and analyzed our own experience of surgery in 40 children.  The most common (27 cases) brain pathology was extended unilateral cortical dysplasia with polymicro- or pachygyria and consequences of perinatal stroke.
Six children had Rasmussen encephalitis; 6 patients had hemimegalencephaly; 1 child with Sturge-Weber syndrome had angiomatosis of the soft meninges.
The patients' mean age was 3 years.
Functional hemispherectomy (hemispherotomy) was used in most cases (37); 3 patients underwent anatomical hemispherectomy.
RESULTS
At the time of discharge, seizures resolved in all patients; later, no seizure recurrence was observed in 25 out of 29 cases with known follow-up (the follow-up median was 2.5 years), which corresponded to class 1 outcomes on the ILAE scale (86%).
Serious complications developed in 2 cases; 1 patient died; hydrocephalus and the need for bypass surgery occurred in other 2 children.
These results are discussed along with the literature data, and the indications for hemispherectomy are provided.
CONCLUSION
Hemispherectomy is a reliable and effective technique for treatment of symptomatic hemispheric forms of epilepsy in children.
More than in 80% of patients with congenital or acquired pathology of one of the cerebral hemispheres, its deafferentation or resection leads to persistent elimination of seizures.
Children with severe forms of intractable epilepsy should be promptly referred to dedicated centers to address the issue of advisability of surgical treatment.
