[The use of transcranial focused ultrasound in CNS diseases].
Transcranial focused ultrasound is a modern medical technique, which provides non-invasive impact on the brain.
Current development stage of this technique is no longer than 20 years and many possible applications of this technique are still at pre-clinical stage.
The greatest progress has been made in the field of functional neurosurgery.
Focused ultrasound enables non-invasive MRI-guided formation of small destruction foci in the relevant targets, providing therapeutic neuromodulating effects in patients with Parkinson's disease, essential tremor, pain syndromes, obsessive-compulsive disorders, and other diseases.
So far, this treatment was carried out in more than 300 patients.  Several cases of ultrasound thermal destruction of intracranial neoplasms were published.
There are attempts to perform third ventriculostomy using ultrasound in animals.
A separate area focuses on the enhancement of the permeability of the blood-brain barrier to various substances driven by focused ultrasound.
The possibilities of enhancing the permeability to chemotherapeutic agents, immune drugs, and other substances are being investigated in laboratories.  A large number of studies focus on treatment of Alzheimer's disease. clinical trials aimed at enhancing the permeability of the blood-brain barrier to chemotherapeutic agents have been initiated.
Reversible neuromodulating, stimulating, and inhibiting effect of focused ultrasound on the nervous system structures is another non-destructive effect, which is currently being actively investigated in animals.
Furthermore, laboratory studies demonstrated the ability of focused ultrasound to destroy blood clots and thrombi.  Transcranial focused ultrasound provides numerous unique possibilities for scientific and practical medicine.
Large-scale research is required prior to the widespread clinical implementation.
Nevertheless, we can already state that implementation of this technique will significantly enhance diagnostic and therapeutic potential of neurosurgery and neurology.
