[Thrombectomy and plication of veins as a method of preventing pulmonary artery thromboembolism at a multidisciplinary surgical hospital].  The authors assessed efficacy and safety of the operation of plication of deep veins of lower extremities, pelvic veins, and the inferior vena cava as a method of preventing fatal pulmonary artery thromboembolism.
A total of 48 patients were operated on.  Of these, 23 patients belonged to traumatological-and-orthopaedical cohort, 3 to general surgical cohort, 4 to gynaecological, and 18 to vascular cohort (isolated deep vein thrombosis).
The length of the floating head of the thrombus varied from 2 to 10 cm.
The presence of a floating thrombus in traumatological, surgical and gynaecological patients, regardless of the length of the floating part was an absolute indication for thrombectomy and venous plication.
Vascular patients were operated on in accordance with the National Guidelines (with the length of the thrombus floating portion of not less than 4 cm).
In all cases, surgical management envisaged direct and indirect thrombectomy.
Plication was always performed above the level of venotomy.
It was shown that thrombectomy combined with plication of major veins is a reliable and safe method of prophylaxis, being in some cases the only possible method of preventing fatal pulmonary artery thromboembolism.  The operation of plication makes it possible not to cancel a scheduled surgical intervention in patients with a detected floating thrombus of major veins.
The operation of thrombectomy and plication above the level of the floating head of the thrombus may be considered an operation of choice in the conditions where there is no possibility to use endovascular methods of treatment (implantation of a cava filter, endovascular catheter thrombectomy), as well as in pregnant women.
Restoration of the venous lumen occurs at safe terms spontaneously, not requiring repeat surgical intervention.
Simultaneous plication of the vein does not complicate the course of the postoperative period of the main surgical intervention.
Thrombectomy and plication do not lead to the development of severe chronic venous insufficiency.
