[The investigation of immunological effects of the new balneotherapeutic preparation glinofir used for the treatment of adjuvant arthritis].
AIM
The objective of the present study was to investigate the influence of a course of application of the modified natural factors on the immunological mechanisms of regulation under experimental conditions with special reference to the application of the natural yellow clay, the clay from the Novo-Pyatigorsk quarry (the lake Tambokan) and of the new balneotherapeutic preparation glinofir based on this modified clay and designed for the treatment of adjuvant arthritis (AA).  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study of anti-inflammatory activity of the externally applied balneomedicines was carried out with the use of an animal model of adjuvant arthritis.  The course of applications started 3 days prior to the initiation of AA and was terminated on the 24th day of the experimental disease.
The action of three balneotherapeutic preparations (Tambukan mud, yellow clay, and modified clay in the form of Glinofir) was compared after they were heated to 42 °C and applied to the animals' limbs for 15-20 minutes every second and third days.  The experiments were performed on Wistar rats (n=59) divided into five groups.
Group 1 was comprised of 9 healthy animals that served as controls.
The animals of group 2 (n=10) presented with untreated experimentally-induced adjuvant arthritis, those of Group 3 (n=10) had model AA treated by a course of application of the Tambukan mud.  The animals of group 4 (n=10) had model AA and were treated by the application of the yellow clay and those of Group 5 (n=10) with model of AA received a course of application of the modified clay.
RESULTS  On day 37 after the induction of adjuvant arthritis, the animals developed leukocytosis (white blood cell count in the blood was 1.5 times higher than in the control group) and alterations in the composition of the lymphocyte population, viz.
B-lymphocytes increased 2-2.5 times (p<0,02) while T-lymphocytes decreased (p<0,05).  A course of glinofir application contributed to the restoration of the T-cytotoxic cell population (p<0,2) and influenced the regulation of pathological immune complexes (PIC) as confirmed the negative correlation between the PIC level and the absolute number of T-cytotoxic cells (r=-0,8, p<0,01).
The chronic stage of AA was associated with a two-fold increase in the absorptive capacity of neutrophils.  The treatment with the Tambukan mud and glinofir restored the phagocytic function of neutrophils and simultaneously reduced the blood leukocyte reaction.
CONCLUSION
The anti-inflammatory action of the Tambukan mud and glinofir manifests itself in the unidirectional changes of dynamics of the characteristics of cellular and humoral immunity.
