[The analysis of compliance of pharmacotherapy of patients with myocardial infarction to the principles evidence-based medicine at the stage of rehabilitation in modern conditions].
GOAL
Acute myocardial infarction is one of the causal factors of society and economic losses of companionship.  Success in the treatment of acute myocardial infarction raises questions on the effective rehabilitation of the first places.
New methods, clinical guidelines and standards have been introduced into clinical practice.
However, the effectiveness of rehabilitation in the Russian Federation lower than developed countries.
The present study was aimed to improve rehabilitation care to patients after acute myocardial infarction.
Analysis of the effectiveness of rehabilitation and pharmacoepidemiological studies was conducted on the basis of a medical spa facility in 2006 and 2009.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Experts form and database were developed to achieve the objectives.
Quantitative assessments were carried out on the basis of the developed quality indicators.  We used pharmacoepidemiological and statistical methods in the study.
RESULTS  Myocardial infarction was often combined with hypertension (73.8% and 61.9%) and chronic heart failure (87.6% and 85.8%).
Patients had a high prevalence of risk factors: smoking (46.1% and 42.3%), overweight (53.8% and 67.2%), dyslipidemia (44.6% and 66.1%) in 2006 and 2009, respectively.
Rehabilitation includes physical exercise, mineral baths, swimming pool.  The average number of drugs of rehabilitation stage was 4,46±0,12 and 4,11±0,11.
Beta-blockers are indicated for all patients after acute myocardial infarction, and they were prescribed in 86.1% and 90.1% of cases.  Drugs affecting renin-angiotensin system were in second place frequency of prescribing.
These drugs are prescribed in 67.6% and 41.7% patients.  The frequency of prescribing of statins increased by 5.8 times from 2006 to 2009 and reached 81.32%.
CONCLUSION
Rehabilitation and pharmacotherapy in patients after acute myocardial infarction corresponds to the principle evidence-based medicine.
However, the list of use drugs was narrow, and the doses were lower than recommended by current clinical guidelines.  These facts may indicate a deficiency of awareness of doctors around the characteristics of drug usage.
Standards of health - resort treatment and rehabilitation of patients after myocardial infarction is limited and their revision is required based on existing clinical guidelines and evidence-based medicine.
