[Mini-orbitozygomatic craniotomy in surgery for supratentorial aneurysms and tumors of the anterior and middle cranial fossae].
UNLABELLED  Progress in microneurosurgical techniques, neuroanesthesiology, and intraoperative imaging enables surgery using small incisions and craniotomy, in accordance with the keyhole surgery concept.
Supraorbital craniotomy is the most widespread minimally invasive approach.  There are a number of supraorbital craniotomy modifications, regarding different soft tissue incisions and the extent of craniotomy.
We present the first results of using mini-orbitozygomatic craniotomy for aneurysms of the anterior circle of Willis and space-occupying lesions of the anterior and middle cranial fossae performed through an eyebrow incision.
MATERIAL AND METHODS  Forty five patients were operated on using mini-orbitozygomatic (MOZ) craniotomy in the period between March 2014 and December 2015.
Fifteen supratentorial aneurysms were clipped, and 30 space-occupying lesions were resected.
Most patients had unruptured aneurysms (10 patients).  Five patients had a history of SAH.
The aneurysm localization was as follows: 8 anterior communicating artery aneurysms, 4 aneurysms of the internal carotid artery in the area of the posterior communicating artery orifice, and 3 ophthalmic aneurysms.
The Hunt-Hess scale was used to evaluate the patients' condition, and the Fisher scale was used to quantify SAH volume.
Surgery was performed 14 days after SAH, on average.
Contrast-enhanced MRI of the brain was the diagnostic method of choice in a group of patients with space-occupying lesions within the anterior and middle cranial fossae.
In some cases, patients underwent CT with reconstruction for assessment of the skull base bone structures.  The mean age of patients was 58.3 years.
RESULTS
All aneurysms were completely excluded from the cerebral blood flow.
No serious complications and deaths in a group of aneurysm patients occurred.
Complete tumor removal was performed in 28 patients.
Two patients having pituitary macroadenomas with supra- and parasellar spread underwent subtotal resection due to adenoma invasion into the cavernous sinus.
Mortality in this group was 3.3% (1 patient).
Postoperative complications were evaluated after 2 weeks and 6 months.
The postoperative cosmetic result after 3 and 6 months after surgery was assessed by patients as excellent.
CONCLUSION
Mini-orbitozygomatic craniotomy is an alternative to classic approaches and can be assistive in surgery for skull base aneurysms and tumors.
Selection of candidates for this keyhole surgery should be based on their critical assessment.
