UNLABELLED  The problem of the development of the new efficient methods for the treatment of the patients presenting with chronic bacterial vesiculitis (CBV) is currently considered among the important priorities.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to provide a scientifically sound substantiation for the application of sinusoidal modulated currents (SMC), magnetic fields, and laser radiation in the combined treatment of the patients with CBV.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
A total of 121 patients presenting with chronic bacterial vesiculitis were examined and treated during the latent phase of the inflammatory process.  They were randomly divided into three groups.
Group 1 (main) was comprised of 40 patients treated, in addition to basal pharmacotherapy, by supravascular contact laser irradiation of the cubital vein area followed after 2-3 hours by the application of sinusoidal modulated currents to the pubosacral region.  Group 2 included 41patents given, besides basal pharmacotherapy, laser therapy in the same regimen as in group 1 supplemented after 2-3 hours by abdominal magnetic therapy.
Group 3 (control) received traditional pharmacotherapy in the combination with antibacterial and anti-inflammatory medicines.  RESULTS
It was demonstrated that the patients of group 2 exhibited the most pronounced positive dynamics of the clinical signs and symptoms estimated from the total National Institute of Health Chronic Prostatitis Symptom Index (NIH-CPSI) and of the characteristics of the quality of life evaluated based on the QLS scale.
The patients of the two former groups experienced a more conspicuous decrease in the activity of the inflammatory process in seminal vesicles, restoration of their structural and anatomical features (as shown by the transrectal ultrasound study), improvement of testosterone metabolism, and normalization of the spermogram characteristics in comparison with controls.
The analysis of the spermograms revealed the tendency toward the increase in the number of actively motile spermatozoa only in the patients of group 2.
The combined treatment of the patients of the two former groups resulted in the decrease of the level of sex hormone-binding globulin and the increase of the free androgen index.
CONCLUSION
The results of the study indicate that the application of the preformed physical factors for the treatment of the patients presenting with chronic bacterial vesiculitis enhances the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy and decreases both the frequency and the duration of relapses of the disease.
