[Uveitis in spondyloarthritis patients and its association with HLA-B27 histocompatibility antigen: prospective study].  AIM
to perform a prospective study of clinical presentation and course of uveitis in spondyloarthritis (SpA) patients as well as its association with the HLA-B27 histocompatibility antigen.
MATERIAL AND METHODS  The study included 219 patients with uveitis, all tested for HLA-B27 antigen and various infections (viral, bacterial, and parasitic) as well as examined for locomotive system involvement.
RESULTS
The presence of the HLA-B27 antigen was determined in 142 (64.8%) out of 219 patients, of them 87 were diagnosed with an entity of the SpA group.  The remaining 77 (35.2%) patients appeared to be HLA-B27-negative, but 13 were still diagnosed with an entity of the SpA group.
There were 10 (4.6%) patients with 2 or more diseases from the SpA group («clinical decussation»).
When comparing the two groups of HLA-B27-positive and negative patients having both SpA and uveitis, no statistically significant difference was found as to the age of onset, site, frequency of attacks, and uni- or bilateral involvement (p>0.05).
We also performed a comparison of HLA-B27-positive and negative patients with no account to their SpA status and revealed a higher complication rate in those that were «negative» (p<0.0001), which can be explained by the fact that HLA-B27-negative patients often have autoimmune or infectious uveitis of different origin notable for long attacks and short remissions.
CONCLUSION
Assessing the site and course of uveitis as well as HLA-B27 testing of uveitis patients has proved important for etiological diagnosis.
Diseases of the SpA group have been shown to be 6.7 times more common in HLA-B27-positive patients as compared to HLA-B27-negative ones.
Clinical presentation of uveitis in the presence of SpA in both HLA-B27-positive and negative patients resembles that of idiopathic uveitis - an independent HLA-B27-associated syndrome (р>0.05).
Cases of «decussation» between entities of the SpA group are usually more severe in terms of clinical presentation and course of uveitis and are associated with a worse prognosis.
Complications of uveitis are more likely to be found in non-SpA HLA-B27-negative patients (р<0.0001).
