[Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease): state of the art].  Thromboangiitis obliterans (Buerger's disease) is systemic vasculitis with predominant development of thrombotic occlusions of small-to-medium diameter arteries of distal portions of both upper and lower limbs.
A distinctive feature of Buerger's disease from other vasculitides is the involvement of the venous bed into the pathological process in the form of migrating thrombophlebitis.  The disease is encountered more often in young adult males, predominantly tobacco smokers.
The clinical pattern is presented by symptoms of increasing insufficiency of blood supply of tissues of extremities.  The diagnosis is made by means of ruling out other vascular diseases (atherosclerosis, diabetes mellitus, systemic diseases of connective tissue, hypercoagulation conditions) based on clinical and laboratory findings, as well as modern methods of visualization, including multislice spiral computed tomographic angiography.
Of special importance is a pathomorphological examination aimed at detecting the signs specific for Buerger's disease: arteries showing intimal hyperplasia
(from stenosis to complete obliteration according to the capillary angiomatosis type, vascular "recalibration", obliteration of lumens by thrombi, lack of calcification of the tunica media; venous alterations are presented by panphlebitis with intimal hyperplasia, and occlusion with thrombi.  Treatment is aimed at eliminating the aetiological stimulus (i. e, smoking), improving blood circulation by means of regular, dosed physical exercises, and administration of anti-ischaemic agents (analogues of prostaglandins, calcium channel antagonists, antiaggregants and anticoagulants).
Failure of conservative treatment failed should be followed by making a decision to perform revascularization (endovascular interventions, bypass reconstructive operations, arterialization of the venous blood flow of the foot, resection of the posterior tibial veins, transplantation of the greater omentum onto the crus).
