[Acute respiratory viral infections: Topical issues of diagnosis, prevention and treatment in therapeutic practice].
AIM  to assess the efficacy and safety of the medication Grippferon with loratadine for the prevention of acute respiratory viral infections (ARVI) and influenza during the epidemics.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
This study included 103 patients (67 men and 36 women) aged 18 to 52 years (mean age 35.3±3.2 years).
During the first visit (september 2015), we collected patient history data on the average rate of ARVI and influenza for the past three years, the disease duration and its symptoms, presence of concomitant allergic pathologies (such as vasomotor rhinitis, hay fever and urticaria) and food allergies.  Appropriate recommendations for the medication use were given to patients.
During the second visit (may 2016), we collected follow-up cards and then analyzed the findings.
RESULTS
33 percent of the patients were fully compliant with the medication dosage regimen.
In the first group (68 people with a history of one-two ARVI cases in the autumn-winter period for the past three years) the average number of ARVI cases in previous years was 1,53±0,23, by comparing with 0,69±0,16 (p<0.01) during the follow-up period, when medication Grippferon with loratadine was used.  No ARVI cases were noted in 21 patients.
In the second group (35 people with a history of three or more ARVI cases for the past three years) the average number of ARVI cases in previous years was 3,69±0,29, by comparing with 2,49±0,22 (p<0.05) during the follow-up period, when nasal ointment Grippferon with loratadine was applied.  Two people reported that they did not have ARVI.
We noted a positive ARVI symptoms dynamics in patients, who received treatment with the given medication.  Specifically, a reduced duration of fever and intoxication periods as well as decreased catarrhal symptoms in the nasopharynx and oropharynx were observed.
CONCLUSION
The results of our study allow us to consider a new combined medication Grippferon with loratadine (nasal ointment) as an effective and safe medication for the prevention and treatment of influenza and acute respiratory viral infections in the complex therapy in adult patients, including patients with allergic history.
