[The influence of the training of the muscular component of the musculo-venous pump in the lower extremities on the clinical course of varicose vein disease].
Investigations of the influence of the training of the muscular component of the musculo-venous pump in the lower extremities on the clinical course of varicose vein disease and correction of the step cycle are currently underway.
AIM
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the impact of the training of the muscular component of the musculo-venous pump in the lower extremities and of the correction of the step cycle on the quality of life of the patients presenting with varicose vein disease.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 22 patients with varicose veins in the lower extremities (CEAP clinical class C3 or C4).  All the patients performed, twice daily during a total of 60 days, a specially designed complex of 7 exercise intended to strengthen the posterior muscle group of the lower legs and correct the step cycle.
RESULTS
After 60 days, all the patients reported the appearance of the subjective signs suggesting positive dynamics of their condition.
The following statistically significant changes were documented: reduction of the malleolar circumference, improvement of integral characteristics of the quality of life as evaluated with the use of the international questionnaire for the patients with chronic lower limb venous insufficiency (CIVIQ), normalization of the frequency and amplitude of modal oscillations in the soleus muscle revealed by electromyography.
The correction of foot rolling muscles and the sequence of activation of the muscles involved in the first five phases of the cycle step increases the strength of contraction of the soleus muscle, promotes venous blood flow in the proximal direction, and thereby enhances the efficiency of the venous outflow.
CONCLUSION
The development of adequate gain skills, the correction of the step cycle, and the strengthening of the muscular component of the musculo-venous pump lead to the improvement of the clinical course of varicose vein disease.
The proposed complex of physical exercises provides an effective and pathogenetically sound additional tool for the treatment of the patients presenting with this pathology.
