[The multifunctional therapy of various forms of irritable bowel syndrome].  Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is a pathological condition characterized by heterogeneous etiology, pathogenesis, and clinical symptoms.
These characteristics dictate the necessity of prescribing multiple medications for the treatment of IBS.  Such compulsory polypharmacy inadvertently enhances the risk of adverse reactions to the treatment, increases its cost, and impairs compliance on the part of the patients.
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the administration of the clorine-bromine brine with the use of sinusoidal modulated current electrophoresis (SMC-phoresis) for the treatment of different forms of IBS.
THE PATIENTS AND METHODS
We examined and treated 80 patients with different forms of IBS.
The patients were divided into two equal groups comprised of 40 patients each.
The patients of the study group were treated with the use of SMС-phoresis of the bromine-chlorine brine based at the «Varzi-yatchi» spa and health resort (the Udmurt Republic) making use of the sparing or stimulating techniques depending on the type of IBS.
Each therapeutic course consisted of 10-12 sessions.
The patients in the group of comparison received the standard pharmaceutical treatment for IBS (myotropic anti-spasmodics and lactulose).
The emphasis was laid on the evaluation of dynamics of the intestinal motor function in different variants of IBS with the use of the EGS-4M apparatus based on the GSRS questionnaire (Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale).  Special attention was given to the interpretation of the main gastrointestinal syndromes and the evaluation of the quality of life of the patients in the course of the treatment and after its completion.
RESULTS
Тhe main symptoms of IBS after a course of SMC-phoresis with the natural brine were significantly less pronounced compared to those in the patients managed by means of standard pharmacotherapy.
Positive dynamics in the clinical picture of the disease had beneficial influence on the quality of life of the patients which approached that of the healthy subjects in the group of comparison.
The results of colonography suggested the presence of various types of disturbances of motor function of the intestines.
SMC-phoresis of the natural chlorine-bromine brine had a positive influence on dyskinesia associated with diarrhea and constipation associated with IBS, while the effect of the standard pharmaceutical treatment was unidirectional and significantly inferior to it in terms of efficiency.
CONCLUSION
The use of complementary therapy can provide a better clinical outcome of IBS and to a greater extent improve the quality of life of the patients presenting with various forms of this pathology.
