[The new directions in the physiotherapeutic applications of the natural potassium salts of the Western Ural].
Salt therapy (halotherapy) as a non-traditional method for the treatment of various pathological conditions has become an increasingly popular therapeutic modality in Russia and abroad.  The Perm region houses one of the largest sylvinite-bearing potash deposits in the world.
These salts are possessed of special physical and chemical properties of great value for the treatment of different diseases.  The objective of the present work was to develop novel approaches to the application of sylvinite for the treatment and prevention of various diseases.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The subjects of investigations were the modern sylvinite constructions of different types.  The study included a total of 195 patients who were randomly divided into two groups.
The main group consisted of 50 patients presenting with allergic respiratory diseases, 20 ones with atopic dermatitis, and 21 with vulgar psoriasis.
31 patients had undergone aortocoronary bypass surgery in the preceding period.  49 pregnant women presented with a complicated course of pregnancy.  24 patients suffered from chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis.
The control group was comprised of 188 persons presenting with the same diseases (46, 30, 18, 20, 49, 25 patients in each of the above groups respectively) who received only the traditional pharmacotherapeutic treatment.
All the patients underwent evaluation of the respiratory and cardiovascular functions.
The clinical manifestations and the skin damage areas were estimated in the patients with atopic dermatitis and vulgar psoriasis.  Blood circulation in placenta, the state of the periodontal tissues, and local immunity in the oral cavity mucosa, as well as the subjective psychological status were evaluated.
The physical and chemical characteristics of the internal environment of the salt constructions (microclimatic factors, radiation, air ionization, salt aerosol content) were estimated.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The data obtained provided a basis for the development and patenting of the methods for the treatment of atopic dermatitis, vulgar psoriasis, placental insufficiency, and chronic generalized catarrhal gingivitis based on the halotherapeutic modalities.
CONCLUSION
The results of the long-term hygienic, physical and clinical investigations made it possible to identify the complex of curative factors inherent in the natural mineral sylvinite constructions.  These factors are believed to create the optimal conditions for the efficient management of the patients presenting with dermatological, cardiological, obstetrical, and stomatological problems.
