[The algorithm for the determination of the sufficient number of dynamic electroneurostimulation procedures based on the magnitude of individual testing voltage at the reference point].  This article was designed to present evidence of the advantages of the personified approach to the treatment of the patients presenting with arterial hypertension (AH), lumbar spinal dorsopathy (LSD), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and duodenal ulcer (DU) at the stage of exacerbation obtained by the measurements of testing voltage at the reference point (Utest).
AIM  The objective of the present study was to develop the algorithm for the determination of the sufficient number (optimal duration) of therapeutic procedures of the protracted treatment with the use of the Utest at the reference point.
THE PATIENTS AND METHODS
The study included 647 patients (439 women and 208 men at the age varying from 25 to 72 years) with grade I-II AH, DU at the stage of exacerbation, grades II and III lumbar spinal dorsopathy, grade II-III COPD.  The informed written content to participate in the study was obtained from all the patients.
They were divided into three groups.  Those comprising group 1 were treated by standard therapy, patients of group 2 received the same treatment supplemented by dynamic electroneurostimulation (DENS) while the patients of the third group were given personified DENS in accordance with the determined sufficient number of DENS procedures.
The blood pressure in the patients with AH comprising group 3 was found to decrease more significantly in comparison with those in groups 1 an 2 (by 9% and 3% respectively).  The intensity of pain syndrome in the patients with lumbar spinal dorsopathy evaluated based on the visual analog scale decreased two-fold in group 3 in comparison with the 1.2 and 1.8 times decrease in groups 1 and 2 respectively.
The level of pH in the stomach of patients with DU increased by 33.3% in group 3 in comparison with 12,5%, in group 1 and 21,8% in group 2.  Vital capacity of the lungs in the patients of group 3 presenting with COPD and treated with the use of the personified approach was found to increase almost up to 612 ml in comparison with 477 ml in the patients given DENS in combination with standard therapy and only 219 ml in the control group.
CONCLUSION
The results of the present study give evidence of the advantage of the personified treatment based on the determination of the sufficient number of the therapeutic procedures needed for the protracted treatment with the use of the Utest at the reference point.
This approach can be used as a tool for the evaluation of the functional state of the patients and a method for the management of a chosen therapeutic strategy.
