[The morphological and morphometric study of amianthoid transformation of the costal cartilage in health and in keeled chest deformity in children].  Amianthoid transformation (AT) is the accumulations of abnormal collagen structures (amianthoid fibers) in the hyaline cartilages, tumors, and tendons.
Neither functional value of costal cartilage matrix AT, nor its role in the pathogenesis of congenital chest deformities is known now.
AIM  to examine the morphological features of AT in the costal cartilage of children with the normal and keeled chest.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
Costal cartilages were studied in 6 children with the normal chest (autopsy material) and in 5 ones with keeled chest (surgical material).
Tissue fragments were fixed in 10% neutral formalin and embedded in compacted paraffin.
The sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, picrofuchsin by van Gieson, with picrosirius, toluidine blue and by the Malaurie method modified by Gallego.  The specimens were examined by light, phase-contrast, dark-field, fluorescence, and polarization microscopy.
The frequency of AT sites and their area were morphometrically studied and the findings were then statistically processed.  RESULTS
Various types of AT in the costal cartilages were described as both the normal and keeled chest.  According to their morphological features, classic, fine-fiber, twisted, and intralacunar types were identified.
There were statistically significant increases in the incidence of all types (except the intralacunar one) and in the area of the fine-fiber AT type in keeled chest deformity as compared to health.
There were positive correlations between the area of classic, intralacunar, and twisted types in both groups and between the area of a classic type and age in the controls.
CONCLUSION
A classification of AT areas varying in structures in health and disease has been given for the first time; their relation to each other and to the presence of keeled deformity shown, which, in our opinion, suggests that AT is implicated in the pathogenesis of the disease.
