[Clinical characteristics of epileptic seizures in insular gliomas].
AIM  To study the characteristics of epileptic seizures in insular gliomas.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Forty-five patients with insular gliomas were examined.
The spread of a tumor was established by MRI results and intraoperational findings.
A tumor within the insular only was found in 9 out of 45 patients (7 left-sided and 2 right-sided).  In 36 patients, a tumor slightly spread into temporal lobe pole and medial-basal regions of the frontal lobe (27 left-sided and 18 right-sided).
The control group consisted of 50 patients with tumors of temporal and frontal lobes.
RESULTS
Paroxysmal symptoms were similar in patients with tumors of the insular and patients with tumors of temporal lobes.
Seizures in patients with frontal lobe tumors differed significantly from insular and temporal tumors, with the exception of a tumor localized in the opercula area.
The following quantitative differences were identified: different forms of unconsciousness were significantly less frequent in symptomatic epilepsy in patients with insular tumor than in epilepsy caused by temporal lobe tumors (36% of patients vs 84% in temporal tumors (p<0.0001)).
In patients with insular tumors, olfactory and taste hallucinations occur more often compared to temporal lobe tumors  (51% vs 16% (p<0.003).
The frequency of paroxysmal seizures of fear and anxiety in patients with those tumors was similar (20% with insular tumors and 14 with temporal tumors).
An autonomic component of episeizures did not differ between tumors of both localizations.
Olfactory and taste hallucinations were qualitatively similar in insular and temporal lobe tumors: smell and taste were unpleasant or associated with a danger: smell of burning, gas, something spoiled, sour, tart chemistry, taste of somethong metallic, chemical, sour.
No pleasant smell or taste were reported.
CONCLUSION
Epileptic seizures in insular tumors had similarities and certain differences compared with temporal seizures that well reflect function of the insula and its links, in the first turn, with limbic system structures.
