[Spinal stroke in a pregnant female with an endodermal cyst of the cervical spinal cord (a case report and literature review)].
AIM
The study purpose was to present a clinical case of spinal stroke in a pregnant female, which was caused by an endodermal cyst of the cervical spinal cord, and to analyze treatment tactics.  RESULTS
A 20 week pregnant female presented with acute transverse spinal cord injury at the of C3-C5 spinal segment level.  CT revealed an extramedullary space-occupying lesion in the ventrolateral position, with compression of the spinal cord at this level.
The patient in the state of progressive deterioration with respiratory failure was transferred to the Neurosurgical Institute on the 5th day after disease onset.
The patient underwent surgery on the 7th day after disease onset.
Doctors of various specialties participated in preparation for surgery.
During surgery, total resection of the space-occupying lesion and spinal cord decompression were performed.
An obstetrician-gynecologist conducted intraoperative fetal monitoring by ultrasound.
The histological diagnosis was an endodermal cyst.
There was no improvement of neurological symptoms in the early postoperative period.
After stabilization of the condition, the patient was discharged for follow-up care at the place of residence.
According to the follow-up report, the patient underwent the cesarean section because of exacerbation of lung infection and a significant delay in the fetal development.
After a few days, the patient died due to multiple organ failure.
The child was alive, in serious condition, under mechanical ventilation.
CONCLUSION
In the case of spinal stroke, the decision on treatment tactics should be made no later than 12 hours after its onset; otherwise, the outcome is usually unfavorable, and a neurological deficit is irreversible.
The decision about continuing pregnancy should be made individually in each case, and an approach to the choice of appropriate treatment tactics should be multi-disciplinary.
