[Transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy in the patients presenting with endocrine ophthalmopathy at the stage of remission: peculiarities of the surgical intervention and the results of exophthalmos correction].
The objective of the present study was to analyze the original results of the transethmoidal decompressive surgical interventions on the eye orbits of the patients presenting with endocrine ophthalmopathy (EOP) including the evaluation of regress of exophthalmos during the post-operative period.
The study included 51 patients with endocrine ophthalmopathy at the stage of remission or pharmacotherapeutic compensation of the underlying process.
A total of 80 eye-socket were treated in 29 patients with unilateral exophthalmos and 22 ones having bilateral exophthalmos.
All the patients underwent transethmoidal decompression of the orbit (TEDO) with the use of the endonasal approach.  The examination before and after surgery included the standard ophthalmological evaluation (such as the external inspection, visiometry, tonometry, computed perimetry, biomicroscopy, and ophthalmoscopy) as well as additional studies including exophthalmometry and orbitometry.
The activity of endocrine ophthalmopathy was estimated with use of the clinical activity score scale.
The main indication for surgery was cosmetically unacceptable exophthalmos.
The results of the analysis of the surgical techniques employed in the present study, anatomical features revealed intra-operatively, methods of post-operative care for the patients, and final outcomes of the treatment taken together have demonstrated the high effectiveness of transethmoidal decompressive surgery.
Not a single case of visual acuity deterioration was documented during the follow-up period.
Persistent convergent strabismus and post-operative diplopia developed in 18% of the patients.  Regress of exophthalmos following transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy varied from 3.5 to 6.5 mm and averaged 5.1 mm in comparison with the mean initial value of 23.9 mm.
In means that transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy ensured the overall regress of exophthalmos by 18.8 mm (p<0.05).
The multispiral CT study revealed the significant reduction of the volume of the eye muscles and the intraorbital adipose tissue.
It is worthwhile to emphasize the necessity of the detailed preoperative examination of the patients.
Our study included the patients presenting with endocrine ophthalmopathy at the stage of remission or pharmacotherapeutic compensation which gave hope of the favourable outcome of the treatment in terms of the degree of regress of exophthalmos and the improvement of the quality of life.
The decision to perform transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy should be taken based on the results of the multidisciplinary conference including an otorhinolaryngologist, ophthalmologist, and endocrinologist.
It is concluded that the results of the present study give evidence of the social significance of transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy taking into consideration that the patients given such treatment experience dramatic improvement of the quality of life.
