[Diagnosis and treatment of benign paroxysmal positional vertigo in common clinical practice].
AIM  To analyze typical medical practice in managing patients with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
33 patients (5 men and 28 women; mean age, 58 years) with BPPV who had been referred for consultation to the Medical Diagnostic Department, Clinic of Nervous Diseases, I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University, regarding for vertigo, were examined.
Information about the disease before visiting the clinic, such as the duration of vertigo, its pattern, and triggers, previously established diagnoses, prescribed treatment and its efficacy, concomitant diseases, was analyzed.
RESULTS
BPPV was not timely diagnosed in 93.9% of cases.
The cause of vertigo was most commonly mistakenly assumed to be cerebrovascular disease (66.6%) and cervical spine pathology (15.1%).
During a primary examination, none of the patients underwent positional tests (otoneurological examination) that formed the basis for the diagnosis of BPPV.
Alternatively, 90.3% of cases underwent instrumental examination: magnetic resonance imaging of the brain, X-ray of the cervical spine, and ultrasonic duplex scanning of the brachiocephalic arteries.
Ineffective diagnosis led to the choice of nonoptimal treatment tactics: instead of therapeutic repositioning maneuvers (RM), the patients received therapy with drugs, such as various vasoactive agents (84.8%), nootropic and chondroprotective drugs (12%), or muscle relaxants (9.1%).
After BPPV was detected, all patients underwent curative RM, which resulted in regression of the disease.
One-year follow-up of the patients showed that the therapeutic effect of RM persisted.
CONCLUSION
Lack of effective and timely diagnosis of BPPV reflects physicians' poor awareness that this condition is the most common cause of vestibular vertigo.
The role of vascular and cervicogenic factors in the development of vertigo is overestimated.
Most patients with BPPV undergo unreasonable examinations and receive ineffective treatment.
It is necessary to raise awareness of BPPV among of physicians and to set up specialized centers for the management of patients with dizziness.
