[Pathogenetic bases and efficacy of slow calcium channel blockers in the therapy of recurrent peptic ulcer disease associated with hypertension].
AIM
To clarify blood calcium concentrations (BCCs) as an indicator of the functional state of the calcium-regulating system in the concomitant course of recurrent peptic ulcer disease (PUD) and hypertension, by comparing with the severity of a ulcerous process, with changes in regional microcirculation, and with the functions of the stomach.
To elucidate the pathogenetic justification for and clinical efficacy of slow calcium channel blockers (SCCBs) in the treatment of this comorbidity.  SUBJECTS AND METHODS
In the case-control study, each patient with recurrent PUD and grade 1, Stage I hypertension (Group 1; n=23) corresponded to a recurrent PUD patient matched for sex, age, and ulcer site (Group 2, n=23).  The complex of treatment for these patients included the SCCB nifedipine.
A control group consisted of 56 recurrent PUD patients who received combination therapy without nifedipine.  All the patients over time underwent clinical and endoscopic examinations and determinations of BCCs, indicators of gastric secretory and motor functions, and regional microcirculation in the gastroduodenal mucosal biopsy specimens.
RESULTS
Recurrent PUD was present with a reliable BCC increase that was more substantial when it was associated with hypertension.
Calcium imbalance was accompanied by changes in regional microcirculation and gastric secretory and motor functional indicators forming an acid peptic factor, as well as by hypermotor dyskinesia, which were more pronounced in patients with comorbidity.
Incorporation of a SCCB into a complex of therapy for recurrent PUD to eliminate the pathogenic effect of blood calcium contributed to more rapid arrest of the clinical symptoms of a recurrence, to elimination of acute-phase microcirculatory disorders in the gastroduodenal zone, and to the recovery of gastric functional indicators.
Elevated blood pressure was ruled out during the therapy of concomitant diseases.
CONCLUSION
Incorporation of a SCCB into the combination therapy of recurrent PUD associated with hypertension is pathogenetically sound and clinically effective.
