[Surgical treatment of eloquent brain area tumors using neurophysiological mapping of the speech and motor areas and conduction tracts].  AIM
To evaluate the efficacy of intraoperative neurophysiological mapping in removing eloquent brain area tumors (EBATs).
MATERIAL AND METHODS  Sixty five EBAT patients underwent surgical treatment using intraoperative neurophysiological mapping at the Pirogov National Medical and Surgical Center in the period from 2014 to 2015.
On primary neurological examination, 46 (71%) patients were detected with motor deficits of varying severity.
Speech disorders were diagnosed in 17 (26%) patients.
Sixteen patients with concomitant or isolated lesions of the speech centers underwent awake surgery using the asleep-awake-asleep protocol.
Standard neurophysiological monitoring included transcranial stimulation as well as motor and, if necessary, speech mapping.
The motor and speech areas were mapped with allowance for the preoperative planning data (obtained with a navigation station) synchronized with functional MRI.
In this case, a broader representation of the motor and speech centers was revealed in 12 (19%) patients.
During speech mapping, no speech disorders were detected in 7 patients; in 9 patients, stimulation of the cerebral cortex in the intended surgical area induced motor (3 patients), sensory (4), and amnesic (2) aphasia.
In the total group, we identified 11 patients in whom the tumor was located near the internal capsule.
Upon mapping of the conduction tracts in the internal capsule area, the stimulus strength during tumor resection was gradually decreased from 10 mA to 5 mA. Tumor resection was stopped when responses retained at a stimulus strength of 5 mA, which, when compared to the navigation data, corresponded to a distance of about 5 mm to the internal capsule.
Completeness of tumor resection was evaluated (contrast-enhanced MRI) in all patients on the first postoperative day.
RESULTS
According to the control MRI data, the tumor was resected totally in 60% of patients, subtotally in 24% of patients, and partially in 16% of patients.
In the early postoperative period, the development or aggravation of a motor neurological deficit was detected in 18 patients: worsening of paresis was observed in 11 patients, and worsening of speech disorders occurred in 7 patients.
After 4 months, motor and speech disorders regressed in 10 patients.
Therefore, a persistent neurological deficit developed after surgery in 8 (12%) patients (motor deficit in 5 cases; speech deficit in 3 cases).
CONCLUSION
Resection of eloquent brain area tumors using intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring enables complete resection of the tumor at a low risk of persistent neurological deficits, which ultimately improves the patient's life prognosis.
