[The causes of recurrent ulcerative gastroduodenal bleeding].  AIM  To explore microcirculatory changes within the first 48 hours after admission, to compare them with clinical manifestations of bleeding and to define the dependence of recurrent bleeding from the therapy.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 108 patients with ulcerative gastroduodenal bleeding who were treated at the Clinical Hospital #71 for the period 2012-2014.
There were 80 (74.1%) men and 28 (25.9%) women.
Age ranged 20-87 years (mean 54.4±16.8 years).
Patients younger than 45 years were predominant (33.4%).
J. Forrest classification (1974) was used in endoscopic characterization of bleeding.
Roccal Prognostic Scale for gastroduodenal bleeding was applied in all patients at admission to assess the risk of possible recurrence.  Patients were divided into 2 groups.
Group 1 included 53 (49.1%) patients without recurrent bleeding; group 2-55 (50.1%) patients who had recurrent bleeding within the first two days of treatment.
RESULTS
Investigation of microcirculation showed the role of vegetative component including blood circulation centralization, blood flow slowing, blood cells redistribution providing sufficient blood oxygenation.  By the end of the first day we observed pronounced hemodilution, decreased blood oxygenation, blood flow restructuring with its acceleration above 1 ml/s, violation of tissue oxygenation, signs of hypovolemia.
These changes were significantly different from group 2 and associated with circulatory decentralization with possible pulmonary microcirculation disturbances and interstitial edema.
This processes contribute to disruption of tissue oxygenation.  We assume that recurrent bleeding in group 2 was caused by fluid therapy in larger volumes than it was necessary in this clinical situation.
CONCLUSION
Infusion therapy should be significantly reduced for the debut of gastroduodenal ulcerative bleeding.
Sedative therapy is advisable to reduce the influence of central nervous system.
