[A differential approach to the improvement of prevention and correction of neuroleptic side extrapyramidal disorders with pantogam activ in patients with schizophrenia].  AIM
To assess the efficacy and safety of pantogam active (PA) in prevention and correction of neurological side-effects during the course neuroleptic treatment of acute endogenous psychoses.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
Eighty schizophrenic patients (mean age 33 years) with acute psychosis were examined.
All patients received 28-day course treatment with typical and atypical neuroleptics.
Two equal groups were studied: patients of the first group were treated with trihexyphenidyl (THP) in dose of 0,002-0,012 mg and patients of the second group received in addition PA in dose 0,9 mg/day.
Clinical-observation, psychometric scales (PANSS, CGI-S, UKU) were administered at baseline and in 1st,3rd,7th, 14th, 21st, 28st day.
RESULTS
PA in the combination with THP improved tolerability to neuroleptic therapy in whole and exerted the better correction effect on neuroleptic extrapyramidal disorders (EPD) compared to THP monotherapy.
The number of patients with ERD was reduced by 1.5 times and prevention of EPD was observed 3 times more frequent in the group treated with PA.
In the THP group, other adverse effects (AE) were 1,7 times more frequent and the total AE score was 2,5 times greater compared to the PA group (131 vs 50).
Correction and preventive effects of the combined treatment on the clinically severe symptoms of EPD (akathisia, muscle dystonia) were more frequent in patients treated with typical neuroleptics.
A less amount of THP (by 1,2 times) was used to stop EPD in the PA group.
CONCLUSION
PA in the combination with THP has demonstrated the clear neuroprotective effect on the development, frequency and clinical presentations of neurological side-effects.
The лалљ can be recommended as a drug of choice for correction and prevention of neuroleptic side-effects, it promotes their tolerability and improves quality of life during the course treatment.
