[The improvement of the abilities to maintain motor coordination and equilibrium in the students presenting with the functional disorders of the musculoskeletal system by introducing the elements of therapeutic physical training into the structure of academic schedule of physical education].
The problem of deterioration of the health status in the university students at present remains as topical as it was before being a major cause of impaired working capacity, disability and/or poor social adaptation of the large number of graduates.  It has been proposed to introduce a class of therapeutic physical training (TPT) into the schedule of physical education for the students.
AIM
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the formation of the skills needed to maintain motor coordination and equilibrium in the students presenting with the functional disorders of the musculoskeletal system (MSS) including scoliosis by the introduction of the elements of therapeutic physical training into their academic schedules.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The main study group was comprised of 32 students (men) at the age of 18-19 years presenting with the disorders of the musculoskeletal system (type III scoliosis, osteochondropathy, and osteochondrosis).
The students of this group received a curriculum aimed at improving their motor skills with the emphasis laid on the selected elements of therapeutic physical training.
The control group was composed of 17 students without disorders of the musculoskeletal system who attended the physical education classes following the traditional program.
The coordination abilities and balance skills were evaluated based on the analysis with the use of the Stabilan-1 stabilographic apparatus.
In addition, the stability test and the Romberg test with open and closed eyes were performed.  RESULTS
The results of the study give evidence that the introduction of the elements of therapeutic physical training into the structure of academic schedule of physical education for the students suffering from diseases of the musculoskeletal system has beneficial effect on the parameters of stability and the general ability to maintain the posture and balance.  Specifically, in the beginning of the academic year, the students of the main study group presenting with the locomotor problems
(the scatter of the manifest disorders in the frontal and sagittal planes, the mean amplitude and velocity of fluctuations of the center of pressure, the area of the projection of the center of pressure displacements as well as the quality of the equilibrium function that characterizes the ability to maintain the posture) were significantly different from the respective characteristics in the control group (p<0,05).  After the course of therapeutic physical training given during the academic year, the scatter of the manifestations in the frontal and sagittal planes as well as the role of the visual control in the maintenance of balance decreased significantly.
CONCLUSION
The present study has demonstrated that the introduction of the elements of therapeutic physical training into the structure of academic schedule of physical education for the students presenting with the functional disorders of the locomotor apparatus exerts the positive influence on the parameters characterizing stability and the ability to maintain the posture as well as equilibrium at large.
Such beneficial effect is apparent in the form of reduction of the amplitude and velocity of fluctuations of the centre of pressure, the decrease in the area of projection of its displacements, and the improvement of the quality of the equilibrium function that characterizes the ability to maintain the posture.
Moreover, the ratio of spreading in the frontal and sagittal planes decreases, and the role of the visual control in the maintenance of equilibrium becomes diminished.
The results of the study give grounds for recommending the introduction of the elements of therapeutic physical training into the learning process of students presenting with diseases of the musculoskeletal system.
