[Modern principles of integrated diagnostics and rehabilitation of perinatal lesions of the nervous system and their consequences].  The article is devoted to the comprehensive diagnosis and treatment of perinatal lesions of the nervous system and their consequences in children.
Reflects modern approaches to data classification conditions, taking into account ideas on the etiology and pathogenesis of the disease, the clinical manifestations of the main syndromes (excitation and depression, hypertensive, convulsive, movement disorders) as the neonatal period, and in the formation of long-term effects (motor and mental delay and speech development, hyperkinetic syndrome, cerebral palsy and others).
Considerable attention is paid to the modern principles of diagnosis (clinical, psychometric, instrumental) and comprehensive rehabilitation (medical, social and psycho-pedagogical) the effects of perinatal lesions of the nervous system.
The results of the review of research on the use of the polypeptide and nootropic neurometabolic stimulator - cortexin - in the complex rehabilitation of perinatal lesions of the nervous system and their consequences in children.  It is shown that the use of cortexin in treatment of critical conditions in newborns reduced the duration of intensive care and the length of stay of patients in a intensive care unit, the average period of hospital treatment and the stage of the primary neurological rehabilitation 2.5-3 times, but also reduces the frequency of detection of syndromes movement disorders in 2 times, hypertension-hydrocephalic disorders 3 times, vegetative-visceral dysfunctions 5 times.
Application cortexin in the rehabilitation of children of the first years of life with the consequences of perinatal CNS indicates a significant improvement in their motor and cognitive functions, as well as predrechevogo and speech development.  Application cortexin significantly improved the forecast recovery of motor, cognitive, and neurological status in general, with full compensation by the end of 1 year of life in 90% of patients, and was accompanied by a decline in disability in extremely premature newborns from 13.6% to 4.6% compared to the standard therapy, as well as reduced length of stay in hospital for 14.7 days of hospital stay.
Revealed the cumulative effect of the drug: maintained for 6 to 18 months with repeated courses of therapy, his positive influence.  High efficiency of cortexin due to a combination of nootropic, neurotrophic, neuroprotective, anticonvulsant and reparative effects, as well as antioxidant, metabolic and anti-stress action, which determines the need for wide application in complex regenerative treatment of perinatal lesions of the nervous system and their consequences.
