[The topical problems of the application of the TASER electroshock devices].  The objective of the present study was the analysis of publications in the foreign medical literature concerning the problems of safety, clinical diagnostics, pathological morphology, and treatment of the patients subjected to the impact by various models of the TASER electroshock devices.
The materials for this article were borrowed from the available Internet resources and libraries.
The methods of scientific analysis were employed to follow up the dynamics of publication and to determine the number of publications on the issues of interest.
The main attention was given to the overview of the subject matter of scientific research and experiments.
The review covers 74 foreign articles presenting the discussion of various conditions and circumstances of the action of various types of the TASER electroshock devices (ESD) on the man with special reference to their effectiveness and safety as confirmed by numerous experimental impacts on the volunteers and animals.  It is shown that the dynamics of relevant publications in the foreign scientific periodicals gives evidence of the strong interest shown by the specialists in various scientific disciplines to the problem of safety of various models of the TASER electroshock devices.
The largest number of the articles (60 or 81.1%) published during the period covered by the present study were submitted by the American authors describing their experiments involving the volunteers, anthropometric dummies, and human corpses (n=38 or 51%).
The subject matter of these publications included the forensic medical evaluation of the lethal outcomes of the application of the TASER electroshock devices with the related technical problems and characteristic of various ESD models.
Despite the extensive studies on the volunteers and the experimental animals, the authors of the publications failed to present direct and conclusive evidence of the lethal consequences of the application of the TASER electroshock devices (ESD) on the man.
Some of them recommend to prohibit (or restrict whenever possible) the targeted application of the electric shock weapons to the thoracic region.  Experiments on the animals have demonstrated the possibility of development of cardiovascular and respiratory complications following the application of the TASER X2 electroshock devices operating at a frequency of 40 Hz during 30 minutes.
The clinical and laboratory studies with the participation of the volunteers in an alcoholic intoxication condition have confirmed the long-term increase in the blood lactate levels under the influence of the electric shocking weapons.
The analogous data suggesting the development of pronounced acidosis under effect of the TASER X2 electroshock devices due to the elevation of the lactate concentration in the venous blood have been obtained in the animal experiments.
The studies of humans in a narcotic intoxication condition failed to provide direct evidence of induction of psychic disorders in the form of an acute confusional state (delirium) under the influence of the TASER electroshock devices.  The evaluation of changes in the skin cover in the form of the punctured or contused wounds in the victims of the application of the electroshock gun projectiles did not revealed any specific signs of the local electrical action.
