[The complications of transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy associated with endocrine ophthalmopathy].  The objective of the present study was the analysis of the results of transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy (TEDO) with the resection of the bone matrix of the medial and inferior orbital walls in the patients presenting with endocrine ophthalmopathy (EOP) with the purpose of reduction of the risk of development of this pathological conditions.
A total of 51 patient with EOP at the stage of complete remission or pharmacotherapeutic compensation underwent transethmoidal decompressive medial orbitotomy in the ENT Clinic of 1 I.M. Sechenov First Moscow State Medical University during the period from 2006 to 2016.
Twenty two of these patients presented with the unilateral process and 29 ones with bilateral exophthalmos.
The surgical intervention was performed on the total of 80 eye orbits.
The main complaints of the treated patients during the post-operative period included difficulties in nasal breathing (33%), dryness of the nose and crust formation (43%), discharge from the nose and along the posterior pharyngeal wall (15%), nasal bleeding (2%), pain in the forehead and maxillary region (8%), headache (2%).  As far as the state of eyes and sight is concerned, 14 (27%) patients reported double vision at the primary gaze position while 6 others (12%) complained of the appearance of diplopia upon a change in the gaze position during the post-operative period.
The post-operative endoscopic study revealed synechiae of different localization in the nasal cavity (47%), discharge from the maxillary sinuses (16%) and from the frontal sinus (2%).
Eight (16%) patients were found to suffer from maxillary sinusitis, one had acute frontitis, and one sphenoidal sinus mucocelle.  These complications were eliminated by pharmacotherapy and additional surgical interventions (2%).
Analysis of the results of the study has demonstrated that the above complications were associated with the inadequate post-operative care for the nasal cavity, the excessively large size of the bone window formed during transethmoidal decompressive orbitotomy, resection of the inferior orbital wall, intrusion of the medial rectus muscle of the eye into the wide bone window.
We evaluated the possible influence of the orbital soft tissues on the physiological parameters of the functioning of the paranasal sinuses in the post-operative period including blockade of the paranasal drainage pathways by the prolapsed orbital tissues.
A few possible approaches to the reduction of the risk of post-operative complications are proposed.
The authors emphasize the importance of the further improvement of the surgical treatment of endocrine ophthalmopathy.
