[The effects of diosmin and hesperidin on capillary blood flow of upper limbs in patients with secondary Raynaud's syndrome].
The article discusses the effects of diosmin and hesperidin on capillary blood flow in patients with secondary Raynaud's syndrome (RS).
Raynaud's syndrome a difficult problem of modern angiology, since in its development there is a large range of disorders of the capillary blood flow of the limbs.
Currently, the main way of therapy in patients with secondary Raynaud's syndrome is the use of either calcium channel blockers (if angiospastic stage of the disease), or prostaglandins of group E1 (with tropho-paralytic stage of secondary RS).
However, pharmacological effects of calcium channel blockers (vasodilation) and prostaglandins (vasodilation, antiproliferative, anti-inflammatory etc.) do not allow impact on all violations of capillary blood flow, occurs when the Raynaud's syndrome.
In this regard, the task was to study the reaction of capillary blood flow of the fingers of the hands on the concomitant use of drugs based on diosmin and hesperidin.
A prerequisite for the use of a combination of diosmin and hesperidin in the treatment of RS was based on data about their impact on the state of the venous segment of the capillary bed and perivascular oedema.
To conduct the study was established two groups of patients (22 in each group).
The main criterion for inclusion of patients in the study was the presence of newly identified Raynaud's syndrome of angiospastic or tropho-paralytic stage of the disease.
The main exclusion criteria was the presence of necrotic stage of the disease.  In the first group of patients therapy was carried out using only vasodilators.
In the second group (comparison group) with the addition of a combination of diosmin and hesperidin (tablets Venarus used in a dose 500 mg 2 times per day).
The condition of capillary blood flow in this study was estimated by the method of videocapillaroscopy (VCS).  Statistical data processing was performed using a criterion of statistical significance (P-value).
The study revealed the significant impact of a combination of diosmin and hesperidin for parameters of capillary blood flow that correlated with clinical improvements - reduction of oedema of the fingers of the hands.
