[Clinical evaluation of the effectiveness of cholinesterase inhibition with neuromidin in the treatment of primary glaucoma patients].  AIM
to investigate neuromidin effectiveness in the treatment of patients with primary glaucoma and compensated intraocular pressure (IOP).  MATERIAL AND METHODS
A total of 40 patients (80 eyes) were examined.
Of them, 10 eyes with early glaucoma, 36 eyes with moderate-stage glaucoma, 33 eyes with advanced glaucoma, and 1 eye with end-stage glaucoma.
In 19 eyes, IOP was controlled through beta-blockers, in 11 eyes - through carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, in 10 eyes - through prostaglandin analogues, and in 39 eyes - through combination drugs.
Twenty-six eyes had received glaucoma surgery some time earlier.  Ipidacrine was prescribed in tablets at 20 mg 2 times daily for 25 days.
Treatment effectiveness was judged by visual functions, hydrodynamics, and morphometric parameters of the optic disc.
RESULTS
In moderate-stage eyes, visual acuity improved in 66.6% of cases and remained unchanged in 33.3%.
In advanced-stage eyes, visual acuity improved in 51.5% of cases and remained unchanged in 48.5%.
Visual field broadened in all cases.
Moreover, under the neuromidin therapy, the number of scotomas in early-stage eyes decreased, while the number of areas with normal sensitivity of the retina increased by 14.9%.
In advanced-stage glaucoma, the effect was less pronounced: the number of type 1 and type 2 scotomas decreased by 3.0±0.6% and 2.9±0.8%, respectively; the number of absolute scotomas did not change; the number of areas with normal sensitivity of the retina increased by 7.4±2.0%.
Also, P0 was found to be reduced and intraocular fluid outflow - activated.
In early and moderate glaucoma, there was a significant reduction in the cup area as well as an increase in the neuroretinal rim area and retinal nerve fiber layer thickness.
In advanced-stage cases, it was only the retinal nerve fiber layer thickness that changed.
CONCLUSION  Neuromidin has a positive impact on visual function, hydrodynamics, and morphometric parameters of the optic disc.
