[Stimulation of angiogenesis by bone marrow cells in experimental ischaemia of lower limb].  The objective of the study was to experimentally substantiate a possibility of treating lower limb chronic ischaemia by means of administration of bone marrow cells.
The study was performed on 100 laboratory 'Wistar' rats subdivided into four groups: intact, control, first and second study groups.
The intact group consisted of 10 animals, with the remaining three containing 30 rats each.
All animals, except the intact ones, were subjected to modelled critical ischaemia of a hind limb by means of excision of major vessels of the extremity.
The rats from the first study group were given 'Myelopid' (calf bone marrow extract) at a dose of 50 μg/kg injected into the femoral muscles 3 hours after the operation, then after 1, 2 and 3 days.
The second study group rats underwent cellular therapy with the mononuclear fraction of bone marrow autologous cells.
Bone marrow was procured from the femoral bone of the contralateral limb.
The exfusate was subjected to double centrifugation followed by isolation of the mononuclear fraction of the bone marrow according to the Boyum technique.
The obtained mononuclear fraction of autologous cells of the bone marrow amounting to 4×106 cells in a volume of 200 μl was injected into the ischaemized limb of the animal.
The control group received no treatment at all.
In the first study group, the level of microcirculation as compared with the control group on day 10 increased by 48.3%, on day 21 by 50.6%, and on day 28 by 105.9%.
In the second study group, the level of microcirculation as compared with the control group on day 10 increased by 67.4%, on day 21 by 85.7%, and on day 28 by 97% (the differences between the two study groups were statistically insignificant).
Neither had the area of muscular necrosis statistically significant differences between the study groups, decreasing on day 10 averagely by 14.75%, on day 21 by 6.5% as compared with the control group animals, to become completely reduced on day 28.
A conclusion was drawn that 'Myelopid' and the mononuclear fraction of autologous cells of bone marrow exerted a positive effect on the level of microcirculation, the scope of necrotic lesion of muscular tissue in the ischaemized extremity of laboratory animals and may potentially be used for treatment of patients suffering from obliterating diseases of lower-limb arteries.
