[Autotransplantation of the internal carotid artery in patients with high localization of an atherosclerotic plaque].  Acute and chronic cerebral circulatory impairment is a very commonly encountered type of neurological diseases, annually affecting more than six million people worldwide.
The absolute majority of all cases are associated with atherosclerosis of cerebral arteries.
Surgical intervention in a stenotic lesion of the internal carotid artery (ICA) is a method of preventive treatment with confirmed efficacy.  Eversion carotid endarterectomy (ECEA) is currently the most commonly used 'open' operation for this cohort of patients.
It is connected with relative technical simplicity of the operative procedure, no foreign material in the wound, low risk of haemodynamic disorders in the zone of reconstruction owing to no considerable alteration in the ICA diameter, as well as favourable remote results.
A disadvantage of ECEA is lack of visual control above the distal portion of the ICA and, as a consequence, limited application of the technique in cases of a highly located atherosclerotic plaque (by more than 2 cm above the bifurcation).
Specialists of the Federal Centre of Cardiovascular Surgery in the city of Penza worked out a modification of the operative technique making it possible to widen the indications for using ECEA.
Its essence consists in total resection of the stenosed portion of the ICA, performing eversion endarterectomy outside the wound, followed by reimplantation thereof with the help of two 'end-to-end' anastomoses, as during prosthetic repair.
This technique was called autotransplantation of the ICA.
Advantages of this technique are considered to include precision of removing the plaque and intimal ruptured fragments, which is easier and more convenient to achieve outside the wound; reliable fixation of the intima and non-stenosing residuals of the plaque by a distal anastomosis, as well as a possibility of using this technique in cases of high location of the plaque.
The purpose of this study was to compare the immediate results_outcomes of ECEA and autotransplantation of the ICA in two groups comprising 108 and 72 patients, respectively.
The measures assessed included the mean time of ICA cross-clamping during surgery, frequency of the development of perioperative strokes, haemorrhage, lesions of craniocerebral nerves, wound complications.
