[First experience with intravascular ultrasonographic examination in diagnosis of post-traumatic obstruction of deep veins].  Intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) is a highly effective method of diagnosis of post-thrombotic obstructions.
Its possibilities by determining the degree and extension of obstructions of deep veins are superior to those of not only non-invasive methods of examination (ultrasonography, CT and MRI) but of phlebography whose results until recently were considered fundamental in diagnosis of the disease concerned.  Limited possibilities of phlebography often lead to diagnostic errors when determining the degree and extension of post-thrombotic obstructions.
Intravascular ultrasonography makes it possible to obtain a maximally objective picture of the degree of intravascular alterations in post-thrombotic diseases, as well as to determine the indications for performing balloon dilatation and stenting of deep veins.
First experience in using intravascular ultrasonography in the Clinic of the Institute of Experimental Medicine confirmed these provisions.
A total of 15 patients diagnosed with post-thrombotic disease while examination were subjected to antegrade transfemoral phlebography in the direct and lateral projections and IVUS.
Significant post-thrombotic obstruction was revealed by phlebography in 3 (20%) of the 15 patients and confirmed by the findings of IVUS.
In 12 (80%) patients only carrying out IVUS made it possible to detect pronounced obstruction of veins (more than 50% of its diameter) remaining undiagnosed by phlebography.
Unnoticed in phlebography turned out to be May-Thurner syndrome in a female patient.
Compression of the left common iliac vein by the right common iliac artery exceeding during systole 70% of the initial diameter of the vein was also revealed while performing IVUS.
At the same time phlebography remains an indispensable method of examination while assessing collateral blood flow, thus making it possible to recommend its performing in combination with IVUS for obtaining the most complete notion on post-thrombotic alterations in deep veins of the inferior vena cava system.
