[Anatomical aspects of formation of corona phlebectatica].
The data concerning the anatomy of perforant veins of the foot can by no means be referred to as insufficiently known.
At the same time, these descriptions are encountered rather rarely in the educational-and-methodical literature.  To a certain degree, this may be explained by low pathogenetic significance of perforant veins of the foot; however, these data are required for the surgeon in carrying out both standard phlebectomy and sclerotherapy of subcutaneous varicose veins, especially if the zone of surgical intervention is situated immediately on the foot.
Also, these data may be important for explaining clinical manifestations of chronic venous insufficiency.
The present study was aimed at specifying the anatomical ground of formation of the corona phlebecatica and topography of perforant veins of the foot.
The material for the study consisted of 15 lower extremities (cadaveric material) with no evidence of chronic venous diseases.
The method of the study - anatomical dissection.
From 4 to 6 perforant veins were found on the medial surface of the foot.
They directly connected the medial marginal vein and vv. plantaris medialis.
From 2 to 3 perforant veins were found on the lateral surface of the foot.
They connected directly the lateral marginal vein and vv. plantaris lateralis.
Topographically perforant veins pass behind the muscles of the lateral group of the foot, along the lateral intermuscular septum.
Perforant veins of each group were found to have lateral affluents part of which independently drained the integumentary tissues of the lateral surfaces of the foot, and part formed anastomoses with the superficial venous plantar net.
This makes it possible to characterize perforant veins not only as anastomoses connecting subcutaneous rear venous net with deep veins of the foot and with the superficial plantar net, but also as independently draining vessels.
Besides, in the majority of cases, nearby a perforant vein we managed to isolate an artery and a nerve branchlet, originating from a. plantaris and n. plantaris.
Hence, perforant veins of the medial and lateral surfaces of the foot constitute the anatomical ground for formation of the corona phlebectatica and are component parts of the neurovascular bundle (vein-artery-nerve).
