[The evaluation of the quality of life in a healthy population with the use of the COMQ-12 questionnaire].  The COMQ-12 questionnaire has been elaborated to evaluate the deterioration in the quality of life of the subjects suffering from chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM) based on the reports of the patients themselves.
This questionnaire is of special interest in that it allows to register the complaints of the patients stated by them in the order of priority beginning from those that are responsible for the most pronounced manifestations of the impairment in the quality of life.
It, in turn, helps the medical practitioner to rationally organize the treatment of a concrete patient taking into consideration his or her individual expectations.
At the current stage of the development and adaptation of the COMQ-12 questionnaire, the main emphasis is placed on the search for the possible range of the key scores and their normal values allowing to characterize the quality of life in the healthy population.
The objective of the present work was to estimate the potential of the COMQ-12 questionnaire for the evaluation of the quality of life among the subjects having no signs of chronic suppurative otitis media.
A total of 60 healthy volunteers were recruited for the study and asked to fill up the questionnaire.
The following information was selected for the subsequent analysis: sex and age of the respondents, experience with having any ear-related problems other than those related to chronic suppurative otitis media in the course of the lifetime.
The patients presenting with chronic suppurative otitis media were excluded from the study.
The score values ranged from 0 to 14 among the entire set of the respondents (mean 3.55).
The resulting score of the respondents' condition was 5 and less in 75% of the cases; it achieved 10 and less out of the possible maximum of 60 scores in 95% of the participants of the study.
It is concluded that the application of the COMQ-12 questionnaire helps to concentrate the attention of the medical specialists on the subjects whose health condition is characterized by score 5 or less and motivates them to carry out the thorough and comprehensive analysis for the interpretation of the data in favour of or against the prescription of the surgical intervention taking into consideration the personal expectations of the patients.
