AIM  to investigate the frequency of the types of fallopian tubal secretory cell expansion (SCE) in diseases of the reproductive organs and to determine the immunophenotype and biological role of the cells in the early stages of the pathogenesis of high-grade ovarian serous carcinomas (HGOSC).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
The investigation enrolled 287 patients with extraovarian diseases and ovarian serous tumors varying in grade, whose fallopian tubes were morphologically and immunohistochemically examined using p53, Ki-67, PAX2, Bcl-2, beta-catenin, and ALDH1 markers.
The material was statistically processed applying the Mann-Whitney test and χ2 test.
RESULTS
The rate of secretory cell proliferation (SCP) (more than 10 consecutive secretory cells) and that of secretory cell overgrowth (SCO) (more than 30 consecutive secretory cells) increase with age in all investigated reproductive system diseases.
The rate of SCP in the corpus fimbriatum of the patients with HGOSC was 5.9 times higher than that in those with extraovarian disease (p<0.01); when comparing the same patient groups, that of SCO was 3.4 times higher (p<0.05).
The immunohistochemical characteristics of the investigated lesions (in scores) were as follows: PAX2 was expressed in the intact epithelium (2.8), in SCP (1.3), in SCO (1.2), in serous tubal intraepithelial carcinoma (STIC) (1.0), and in HGOSC (0.9); Bcl-2 was in the intact epithelium (2.2), in SCP (2.1), STIC (0.9), and in HGOSC (0.6), β-catenin was in the intact epithelium (0.5), in SCP (2.85), in SCO (2.95), in STIC (0.6), and in HGOSC (0.5); ALDH1 was in the intact epithelium (0.5), in SCP (2.91), in SCO (2.92), in STIC (1.2), and in HGOSC (0.6).
There were statistically significant differences with a 95% confidence interval (p<0.05) for: 1) PAX2 between the intact epithelium and pathology (fallopian tube lesions and HGOSC); 2) Bcl-2 between the intact epithelium and SCE (SCP and SCO) and between SCE and HGOSC; 3) beta-catenin between the intact epithelium and SCE (SCP and SCO) and between SCE and HGOSC; 4) ALDH1 between the intact epithelium and SCE, between and SCE and STIC, and between STIC and HGOSC.
CONCLUSION
SCE was shown to be an independent intraepithelial lesion.
The incidence of this abnormality increased with age and significantly differed in the patients with fallopian tubal lesions in extraovarian diseases from that in those with malignant ovarian serous tumors (by 5.3 times), while these groups showed a three-fold difference in SCO.
Thus, SCP may serve as a more sensitive marker for the early stages of the pathogenesis of ovarian serous carcinoma.  The studied types of SCE demonstrated multiple molecular events (loss of PAX2 expression and increased Bcl-2, beta-catenin, and ALDH1 expressions), some of which underwent considerable changes, by increasing the severity of a pathological process (loss of ALDH1, and beta-catenin, and bcl-2 expressions).
Thus, therapeutic exposure in the early stages of pathogenesis may have a few points of application and just several molecules can serve as independent markers for early pathological changes in the fallopian tubal epithelium.
