[Giant partially thrombosed aneurysm of the vertebral artery: a case report and literature review].  INTRODUCTION
Giant partially thrombosed aneurysms of the vertebral artery are recalcitrant to treatment by microsurgical trapping and thrombectomy.
Application of endovascular interventions is limited due to substantial brainstem compression and cranial nerve neuropathy.  Combined endovascular exclusion and microsurgical excision provides an approach to treatment of these lesions.
CLINICAL CASE
A 48-year-old female patient presented with progressive complaints of ataxia, diplopia in left lateral gaze, and dysphagia.
Imaging studies (CT, MRI, angiography) revealed a giant partially thrombosed aneurysm of the right vertebral artery and pronounced brainstem compression.
TREATMENT
The initial phase of treatment involved endovascular occlusion of the vertebral artery and aneurysm trapping that did not lead to changes in the postoperative patient's neurological status.
MRI demonstrated complete aneurysm thrombosis and a weak TOF signal in the vertebral artery near the proximal aneurysm neck region.  Because of persistent brainstem compression, the patient underwent right suboccipital craniectomy and hemilaminectomy of the CI arch for aneurysm excision one week after endovascular occlusion.
After isolating the aneurysmal sac, the vertebral artery was transected, and two small branches extending from the aneurysm neck to the brainstem were also coagulated and transected, followed by aneurysm excision.  Numerous vasa vasorum in the wall of the proximal vertebral artery and aneurysm neck were coagulated to stop bleeding.
After surgery, the patient developed neurological symptoms (right leg ataxia and dysphagia worsening) due to lateral medullary infarction (confirmed by MRI) that presumably resulted from coagulation of two small perforating branches coming from the aneurysm neck to the brainstem.
Recovery of the patient's neurological functions was observed during conservative treatment.  The patient was discharged with mild right leg ataxia and preoperative left-sided abducens paresis.
CONCLUSION
Medulla oblongata compression associated with a giant thrombosed aneurysm of the vertebral artery can be eliminated by endovascular trapping followed by surgical excision of the aneurysm.
Preserving the vasa vasorum feeding the brainstem is crucial for prevention of ischemic complications.
