[The significance of the results of crash-tests with the use of the models of the pedestrians' lower extremities for the prevention of the traffic road accidents].
The disabling injuries inflicted during road traffic accidents (RTA) create a serious challenge for the public health services and are at the same time a major socio-economic problem in the majority of the countries throughout the world.
The injuries to the lower extremities of the pedestrians make up the largest fraction of the total number of the non-lethal RTA injuries.  Most of them are responsible for the considerable deterioration of the quality of life for the participants in the accidents during the subsequent period.
The objective of the present study was to summarize the currently available results of experimental testing of the biomechanical models of the pedestrians' lower extremities in the framework of the program for the prevention of the road traffic accidents as proposed by the World Health Organization (WHO, 2004).
The European Enhanced Safety Vehicle Committee (EEVC) has developed a series of crash-tests with the use of the models of the pedestrians' lower extremities simulating the vehicle bumper-pedestrian impact.  The models are intended for the assessment of the risk of the tibia fractures and the injuries to the knee joint ligaments.
The experts of EEVC proposed the biomechanical criteria for the acceleration of the knee and talocrural parts of the lower limbs as well as for the shear displacement of the knee and knee-bending angle.  The engineering solution of this problem is based on numerous innovation proposals being implemented in the machine-building industry with the purpose of reducing the stiffness of structural elements of the bumper and other front components of a modern vehicle designed to protect the pedestrians from severe injuries that can be inflicted in the road traffic accidents.
The activities of the public health authorities (in the first place, bureaus of forensic medical expertise and analogous facilities) have a direct bearing on the solution of the problem of control of road traffic injuries because they are possessed of comprehensive and reliable objective information about all forms of the damage to health associated with vehicle-pedestrian collisions and their victims' condition.
It is concluded that making use of the experience and professional knowledge of forensic medical experts and automotive specialists could considerably contribute to the enhancement of safety of all the participants in the vehicular traffic.
