[The decreased level of plasma carnitine in patients with epilepsy].  Antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) have long been known to affect carnitine metabolism, dropping the plasma free carnitine.
Valproate (VPA) was considered to be the strongest carnitine-reducing agent.  VPA-induced hyperammonemic encephalopathy and hepatotoxicity are well known, and pre-existing carnitine deficiency can be a predisposing factor, especially in congenital metabolic disorders.
Several studies have shown that carnitine supplementation in patients receiving VPA to result in subjective and objective improvements and to prevent VPA-induced hepatotoxicity and encephalopathy, in parallel with increases in carnitine serum concentrations.
Level of free plasma carnitine <20 micromol/l (syn. carnitine deficiency) in patients with epilepsy (in 15-30% of cases) may occur not only with administration of VPA but with administration of other AEDs (phenobarbital, phenytoin, carbamazepine) and low nutritional intake of carnitine.  Some findings indicate that the number of AEDs used is a risk factor for carnitine deficiency.
It was established that body weight, height and multidrug therapy are significantly associated with low level of free plasma in epileptic patients.  Carnitine deficiency can have severe consequences; but most epileptic patients suffering from it are asymptomatic.
Although carnitine deficiency is not uncommon among patients receiving AEDs, it seems not necessary to routinely monitor carnitine levels in epileptic ambulatory patients, this is reasonable only in groups of risk.  L-carnitine supplementation is clearly indicated in case of VPA-induced hepatotoxicity (i.v. administration) VPA overdose (i.v. administration), primary carnitine-transporter defect and is strongly recommended in specific secondary carnitine deficiency syndromes, symptomatic VPA-associated hyperammonemia, infants and young children receiving VPA, especially those younger than 2 years, patients with a complex neurologic disorder, who are receiving multiple AEDs, patients who have risk factors for hepatotoxicity and carnitine insufficiency.
In the absence of double blind trials, clinical practice is based on empiric observation, clinical experience, and theory.  Well-designed studies of specific and general uses of L-carnitine replacement therapy in patients with epilepsy are needed.
