[The application of low-frequency ultrasound for the comprehensive treatment and rehabilitation of the patients presenting with chronic endometritis].
The incidence of chronic endometritis remains rather high despite considerable progress in reproductive medicine including the advent of the new methods for assisted reproduction; the pregnancy rate after the treatment of this condition is still unacceptably low.  It implies the necessity of the careful preparation of endometrium for the implantation of the embryo especially in women with a history of unsuccessful outcomes of the IVF treatment.
It calls for the development of the efficient therapeutic modalities for the management of chronic endometritis and restoration of the normal reproductive function; their introduction into the therapeutic algorithm remains equally relevant.  The characteristic features of chronic endometritis include blood circulatory disorders in the vessels of the uterus and in the pelvic vascular basin, changes of local immunity in the endometrium concomitant with the activation of cellular and humoral responses of inflammation in the form of enhanced leukocyte infiltration and increased production of cytokines.
The long duration of such a process results in the development of fibrosis that, in its turn, leads to chronic tissue hypoxia, potentiation of inflammation, and disruption of decidualization that hampers successful implantation.
The article shows the possibility of using low-intensity ultrasound for the treatment and rehabilitation of the patients presenting with chronic endometritis.
The data concerning the primary biophysical processes developing in the tissues under the influence of ultrasound are discussed.  The therapeutic effects and their underlying mechanisms and described.
The physiotherapeutic treatment considerably improved vascular hemodynamics in the pelvic basin and produced trophotropic, defibrosing, and anti-inflammatory effects.  The clinical data giving evidence of the high effectiveness of the application of intrauterine ultrasound cavitation provide a basis for the recommendation to include this physical factor in the existing algorithms for the pre-gravid preparation of the women presenting with disorders of the reproductive function and chronic endometritis.
