[The application of the acupuncture techniques for the combined treatment of neurotic tics in the children].
At present, the frequency of neurosis in the children is growing under the influence of the increasingly intensive stressful factors.  The neurotic ticks are one of the manifestations of neurosis in the children characterized by involuntary movements; they are often accompanied by hyperactivity, deficit of attention, fatigue, and headaches.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of acupuncture used for the treatment of neurotic tics in the children.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study was carried out at the basis of the department of children's rehabilitation of the Moscow city polyclinic #39.  All the children were counselled by a neurologist, psychologist, and acupuncturist.
An electroencephalogram was obtained from each patient and a questionnaire study involving the patients' parents was conducted.
The patients were treated with the application of reflexotherapy and were given recommendations of a psychologist.  A total of 30 children at the age from 6 to 12 years were available for the examination.
The participants of the study were allocated to two groups depending on the strategy of the outpatient care.
Group 1 was comprised of the patients (n=17) who were given 3 courses of reflexotherapy in addition to pharmacotherapy and psychologist's recommendations.
The patients included in group 2 served as controls (n=13) and received only medications and psychotherapy without acupuncture.  The effectiveness of the treatment was evaluated based on the dynamics of the patients' complaints.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The resullts of the study give evidence of the higher effectiveness of the treatment of the children suffering from neurotic ticks with the application of acupuncture therapy compared with the conventional approach.  A few courses of reflexotherapy provided in the combination with pharmacotherapy and the compliance with the recommendations of a psychologist resulted in the more efficient elimination of the neurotic tics together with the associated hyperactivity, deficit of attention, fatigue, and headaches than the use of medication therapy and psychotherapy without acupuncture.
