[The nephroprotective potential of peloid therapy used for the rehabilitation of the patients presenting with chronic pyelonephritis].  This review article presents the data on the mechanism of action of peloid therapy from the perspective of its defibrosing effect, the structure and functions of the extracellular matrix under the normal and pathological conditions.
In addition, role of this treatment modality in the progression of tubulointerstitial fibrosis which determines the severity and prognosis of chronic pyelonephritis is considered.
The researchers are currently carry out the extensive studies aimed at the search of the methods for the primary and secondary prevention of chronic pyelonephritis.  A wide range of pharmacotherapeutic modalities are currently used for this purpose.
Moreover the development of long-acting anti-relapse medications is currently underway along with the further improvement of high-tech reconstructive surgical methods for the intervention on the organs of the urinary system.  At the same time, the nephroprotective potential of the natural physical factors, such as therapeutic muds, e.g. peloids, remains poorly explored even though their well apparent thermophysical properties, unique organic and mineral composition, and saturation with biologically active compounds are well known long ago.
The systemic response to peloid therapy manifests itself as the changes in the metabolism of the intercellular matrix and collagen of the connective tissue associated with the alterations in the process of fibrogenesis and the development of tubulointerstitial disorders.  The direct and indirect influence of peloids on the connective tissue is possible.
The indirect effects are attributable to the peloid impact on the antioxidant status, immunity, hormonal regulation, and metabolic processes.  These findings suggest the necessity of the relevant experimental and clinical studies for the evaluation of the influence of peloid therapy on the structure and metabolism of the connective tissue in the kidneys including dynamics of the markers of inflammation, proliferation and fibrogenesis, and the hormonal status of the patients suffering from chronic pyelonephritis based on the application of the modern technologies in accordance with the requirements of evidence-based medicine.
