AIM  The objective of the present study was to identify the peculiar features and advantages of different methods for the mechanical impact on the thoracic tissues of the patients presenting with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and to develop specific indications for their clinical applications.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
This randomized prospective comparative study included 137 patients with COPD.
In accordance with the currently accepted classification (GOLD, 2013), all the patients had COPD of medium severity.  The smoldering inflammatory process was diagnosed in 75 (54.7%) patients, grade I and II respiratory insufficiency in 80 (58.4%) and 57 (41.6%) patients, respectively.
The external respiration function was evaluated by means of pneumotachometry techniques during the forced expiratory maneuver and by spirometry.
The pulmonary hemodynamics and myocardial contractility of the right ventricle were studied with the use of rheopulmonography and central hemodynamics by tetrapolar thoracic rheography.
The routine inflammatory and immune tests were employed.
RESULTS
Investigations of the systemic circulation have demonstrated the prevalence of its hyperkinetic type (54,0%) over the hypokinetic and eukinetic ones (23,3% and 22,7% respectively).
All the patients were divided into three group identical in terms of clinical and functional characteristics.
The patients comprising group 1 (n=46) were prescribed the rehabilitative treatment in the form of classical chest massage, those of group 2 (n=47) were treated by means of intense massage of asymmetric chest zones, and the patients included in group 3 (n=44) underwent manual therapy.
It was shown that intense massage produced the most pronounced beneficial effect.
Classical massage also resulted in the reduction of the inflammatory manifestations but its effectiveness was significantly lower than that of the intense treatment (р<0,05-0,02).
Manual therapy failed to cause any appreciable changes in the character and severity of the inflammatory process (р>0,5).
CONCLUSION
The intense massage of asymmetric chest zones proved to provide the most efficient tool for the anti-inflammatory treatment of the patients presenting with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in comparison with other known methods for the mechanical impact on the thoracic tissues.
However, the application of this technique is limited in the patients with the hypokinetic type of systemic circulation and pulmonary hypertension.
The most important advantage of chest massage by the conventional method is the possibility of its application for the treatment of the patients suffering from severe forms of COPD associated with pulmonary and systemic cardiohemodynamic disturbances with alveolar hypoxia.
Manual therapy can be recommended in the first place to the patients with COPD in remission and the accompanying functional blockade of the vertebral segments.
