[The application of impulse magnetic therapy for the treatment of the patients presenting with lymphedema of the lower extremities].  AIM
The principal objective of the present work was to evaluate the influence of impulse magnetic therapy on the state of the microcirculatory system in the patients presenting with lymphedema of the lower extremities.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 59 patients with stage of 1 and 2 lymphedema who were divided into two groups.  Those comprising the first group had impulse magnetic therapy applied to their lower extremities while the patients making up the second group served as controls.
All the patients were examined with the use of the laser Doppler flowmetry (LDF) that revealed the initially present pathological changes in the microcirculatory system of their lower extremities.  RESULTS
The study has demonstrated that the application of impulse magnetic therapy produced a positive effect on all the constituent components of the microcirculatory blood stream of the patients suffering from lymphedema of the lower extremities.  Specifically, the initially increased arteriolar tonus was decreased, the blood flow in the capillary vessels was improved, and congestive phenomena in the venular segments of the microcirculation blood stream were markedly reduced.
The results of the LDF examination in the control group gave no evidence of significant changes in the patients' microcirculatory system.
The results of the LDF examination of the patients of the control group suggested the absence of any appreciable changes in the microcirculatory system.  CONCLUSION
The present study has demonstrated the advisability of the application of impulse magnetic therapy for the treatment of the patients presenting with lymphedema of the lower extremities as a minimally invasive technique for the evaluation of the condition of the microcirculatory system and the objective assessment of the effectiveness of the outcomes of physiotherapy in the patients with vascular pathology.
