[Oxidative carbonylation of proteins in experimental hind-limb ischaemia-reperfusion injury].
Formation of carbonylated protein derivatives is one of the key signalling pathways in cellular damage and may be regarded as a reliable marker in cellular injury.  It allows evaluating both direct effects of reactive oxygen species and indirect interrelations with the secondary by-products of oxidation.
The present study was undertaken to investigate the activity of lysosomal cysteine proteinases (cathepsins B and L) in blood serum and the arterial wall in an experimental model of ischaemia and ischaemia-reperfusion injury.  To this was added comprehensive assessment of oxidative modification of proteins derived from blood serum and the arterial wall, namely, calculating the area under the curve of the absorption spectrum of the products of protein carbonylation, the proportion of the primary and secondary markers of oxidative stress, as well as the reserve and adaptation potential.
The obtained findings were indicative of the development of oxidative stress in the model of ischaemia-reperfusion injury from day 1 to day 7, and in the ischaemia model on day 3 and day 5 in both the vascular wall and blood serum, which was accompanied by activation of cathepsins B and L. Reversible oxidation of proteins was observed on days 3 and 5 in the experimental ischaemia model and on days 1 and 7 in the ischaemia-reperfusion injury model, which was confirmed by the predominance of the primary markers of oxidative stress.
Irreversible oxidation of proteins, i. e., the predominance of the secondary markers, was suggestive of the enhancement of oxidative stress, its transition to the late stage, leading to the loss of biological properties of proteins and eventually followed by their aggregation and degradation as seen in the ischaemia-reperfusion injury model on days 3 and 5.  Analysing the obtained findings revealed direct correlation between the total area under the curve of oxidative modification of proteins and overall activity of cathepsin L in the ischaemia model: in blood serum on days 3 and 5, in the vascular wall for cathepsins B and L on day 5; in the ischaemia-reperfusion injury model: the activity of cathepsin L in blood serum on day 3, in the vascular wall on day 5 for cathepsins B and L.
