[Shunt-induced craniosynostosis: topicality of the problem, choice of the approach, and features of surgical treatment].  RATIONALE
Shunt-induced craniosynostosis is one of the late complications of CSF shunting surgery, which affects the patient's condition, clinical picture, and treatment approach.  OBJECTIVE
to evaluate the prevalence rate and clinical significance of this disease, define the indications for surgery, and choose the optimal surgical approach.
MATERIAL AND METHODS  The study included 59 children with shunt system dysfunction, aged 1 to 14 years, who were treated at the Department in the period from 2014 to 2016.
The inclusion criteria were as follows: 1) age at the time of examination is older than 1 year; 2) implantation of a shunt system in the first 12 months of life.
The state of cranial sutures was assessed using three-dimensional reconstruction of patient's computerized tomography images.
Images obtained before or in the first months after primary implantation of a shunt system were used to exclude cases of primary craniosynostosis.
RESULTS
Premature synostosis of the cranial sutures was detected in 27 (46%) cases.
Of these, 3 (11%) patients with clinical symptoms of increased intracranial pressure and radiographic signs of craniocerebral disproportion underwent cranial vault remodeling surgery: two biparietal craniotomies and one fronto-parieto-occipital reconstruction.
In two cases, simultaneous replacement of a valve with a programmable one was performed.
There were no complications after reconstructive surgery.
CONCLUSION
Shunt-associated craniosynostosis is one of the late complications of CSF shunting surgery.
However, its presence is not an indication for surgery and should not be a reason for surgical aggression.
Surgery for increasing the intracranial volume is indicated only for secondary craniosynostosis combined with signs of craniocerebral disproportion.
In these cases, reconstructive surgery is an effective treatment option for improving the patient's condition.
