[A new stage of development of gerontology and geriatrics in Russia: Problems o creation of a geriatric care system.  Part 2.
The structure of the system, scientific approach].  The publication is the second part of the analytical review on the new stage of development of gerontology and geriatrics in Russia.
Components of social support system for senior citizens and the structure of social-medical care as its crucial components are presented.  The problem of positioning of geriatric care within the system of social support for senior citizens, as well as its peculiarities and the algorithm providing geriatric care are discussed.
The analysis of this algorithm allowed us to justify the indissoluble link and continuity of individual components of geriatric care and its cost-effectiveness.
The position of the Russian Federation Ministry of Health concerning of introduction of geriatric care as an element in the system of medical care for older citizens was looking through.
The pilot project «Territory of Care» proposed by the Russian Federation Ministry of Labor and Ministry of Health for establishment of long-term system of medical and social care to citizens of the older generation on the principles of multidisciplinary and interdepartmental interaction was elucidated as well.
Some failures of the project have been highlighted and recommendations for its development were stressed.
The role of gerontology as a systemic basis for creation of geriatric service in Russia and for the development of an integrated social and medical care to citizens of the older generation was underlined.
The main priorities in the field of aging in the forthcoming decade are formulated.  The most promising areas of research in the field of gerontology were discussed, the implementation of which will allow to realize the State social policy goals focused on the quality of life of senior citizens.
Finally, the position of Gerontological Society of the Russian Academy of Sciences on the creation of mechanisms of scientific support for the renovation of geriatric services, including collaboration with experts in the field of practical medicine, social workers, and organization of scientific coordination of all efforts for the development of geriatric care to citizens of the older generation are presented.
