[The importance of vestibular evoked myogenic potentials for the assessment of the otolith function in the patients presenting with benign paroxysmal positional vertigo].  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the otolith function in the patients presenting with idiopathic benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (pBPPV) attributable to the occlusion of the posterior semicircular canal (PSCC) of the inner ear with the use of vestibular evoked myogenic potentials (VEMP).
Cervical (cVEMP) and ocular VEMP (oVEMP) were measured in 34 patients with idiopathic pBPPV before and 7 days after the treatment by means of reposition maneuvers.
The results of the repeated Dix-Hallpike test performed 7 days after the repositioning maneuver were negative in 27 patients and positive in 7 patients.
There was no statistically significant difference in the amplitude of cervical VEMP between the healthy and affected ears either before or after the repositioning treatment.
The measurement of oVEMP revealed a reduction of the response amplitude on the affected side.
The average values of the plnl on the healthy side were 12.84±1.09 and those on the affected side 4.62±0.69 (p<0,05).
The successful repositioning treatment resulted in a significant increase of the oVEMP amplitude on the affected side (p<0,05).
In the patients presenting with the persistent symptoms of pBPPV, the repositioning maneuvers did not cause an appreciable increase in the amplitude of oVEMP on the affected side (p<0.05).
The results of the present study give evidence that pBPPV of the posterior semicircular canal is associated with the impairment of the function of the receptor structures of the utriculus and the preserved function of the succulus as suggested by the reduction of the oVEMP amplitude and clinically significant asymmetry of ocular VEMP on the affected side with intact cervical VEMP on both sides.
The successful treatment of pBPPV of PSCC with the use of the liberatory maneuver results in the increase of the oVEMP amplitude on the affected side increases while the response asymmetry between both sides significantly decreases which indicates the repair of the utriculus otolith function.
