[Possibilities of cavinton therapy regimen for infusions and cavinton comforte in acute and early recovery periods after ischemic stroke].
AIM
To study the efficacy of a current regimen of treatment with cavinton for infusions and cavinton comforte in patients with ischemic stroke in acute and early recovery periods and to evaluate an impact of treatment on erythrocyte deformity using atomic power microscopy.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
One hundred and sixty-four patients with hemispheric ischemic stroke, aged from 30 to 79 years, were randomized into main (n=100) and control (n=64) groups.
Patients of the main group received complex treatment (basic therapy and cavinton R for drop infusions (10 intravenously during 10 days) followed by cavinton R comforte in dose 10 mg, 1 tablet 3 times a day during 90 days).  Patients of the control group received basic therapy only.
NIHSS, the Rankin scale, the Barthel index, MMSE, MоCA, the Rivermead scale, Beck depression scale, HADS were used to measure the severity of patient's state.  To study the erythrocyte membrane by estimating Young's modulus, dry preparations were made with the following scanning of erythrocytes using atomic power microscopy.
RESULTS  Positive changes on all scales were observed in both groups.
Higher scores on NIHSS, Rankin, Barthel, MоCA, MMSE, Rivermead mobility index were found in the main group compared to the controls.
There were no differences in scores on the Beck depression scale and HADS.  A decrease in Young's modulus was found in the main group while in the control group this index remained unchanged.
CONCLUSION  More rapid and complete regression of neurological deficit, better recovery of self-care function, cognitive function and social activity, an increase in erythrocyte membrane elasticity were found in the main group compared to the control one.
These results indicate the efficacy of cavinton R and cavinton R comforte in the regimen used in complex treatment in acute and early recovery periods after ischemic stroke.
