[The application of different non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the elimination of pain syndrome during the early postoperative period in the children following the surgical interventions on palatine tonsils].  The present clinical study included 120 children at the age varying from 6 to 18 tears who had undergone radiowave tonsillotomy followed by symptomatic therapy during the early postoperative period with the application of different non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
All the patients were randomly allocated to four groups each comprised of the equal number of patients.
Those of group 1 were treated with ketoprofen lysine salt (КLS) in the form of a solution for oral intake in case of complaints of severe pain in the throat.
The patients of group 2 received courses of ketoprofen lysine salt therapy per os thrice daily during 3 days after the surgical intervention.
The patients of group 3 were given ibuprofen per os up to three times every day in case of complaints of severe pain in the throat.
The patients of group 4 were treated with ketoprofen lysine salt in the form of a solution for the local application twice daily during 3 days after the surgical intervention.
The results of the analysis with the use of the analog-visual scale have demonstrated that a decrease in pain intensity within 24 hours after surgery was much more pronounced in the patients of group 2 in comparison with those of the remaining three groups (р<0.05).
The difference of pain intensity in the throat evaluated based on the analog-visual scale between the patients of groups 1, 3, and 4 was insignificant (p>0.05).
None of the children exhibited the signs of bleeding throughout the entire observation period.
It can be concluded that a course of therapy with the use of ketoprofen lysine salt for oral intake during the early period after the surgical intervention for radiowave palatine tonsillotomy has some advantages over a single intake of the analogous preparation (for alleviation of strong pain in the throat), an ibuprofen syrup or a ketoprofen lysine salt solution for throat wash.
