[Percutaneous endoscopic discectomy in the treatment of patients with degenerative diseases of the lumbosacral spine].  Modern surgery uses a variety of treatments for spine pathology.
Endoscopic techniques have become particularly popular across the world over the past decade.  In this article, we summarize our experience and analyze the immediate and long-term results of surgical treatment of lumbar disc herniation using a percutaneous fully endoscopic technique for removing the herniated intervertebral disc, which is new for Russian medical practice.
OBJECTIVE  to evaluate the efficacy of percutaneous endoscopic discectomy in the treatment of herniated lumbar discs in patients with radicular pain syndrome.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
We conducted a cohort retrospective study that included 69 patients who underwent herniated disc removal using the percutaneous endoscopic technique.
Surgery was performed through two approaches: the intralaminar approach was used in 44 patients, and the transforaminal approach was used in 25 patients.
To assess the efficacy of surgery, we used a visual analogue scale (VAS) of pain: the intensity of local pain (VAS1) and the intensity of radicular pain (VAS2).
Changes in the quality of life and ability to work were assessed by using the Oswestry scale; patient satisfaction with treatment was assessed by using the MacNab scale.
RESULTS
The mean follow-up period after surgery was 24 months.
An analysis of changes in the pain syndrome (VAS1 and VAS2) before surgery and in the early postoperative period demonstrated a significant regression of pain regardless of the approach type (r=0.25).
Patients' survey (MacNab scale) in the long-term postoperative period revealed no unsatisfactory results; excellent, good, and satisfactory results were observed in 21 (30%), 32 (46%), and 16 (24%) patients, respectively.
CONCLUSION
Percutaneous endoscopic discectomy is an effective surgical treatment for degenerative diseases of the lumbosacral spine, providing excellent and good treatment outcomes in most operated patients.
