[The experience with the application of ozone therapy for the treatment of periodontitis in musicians-instrumentalists].  Playing various musical instruments is the cause of an additional load that affects the condition of dentition and of all organs and body systems at large.
Each group of instruments is known to exert a specific impact on the health of the musicians including the undesirable influence on the state of thir oral cavity, such as a change of occlusion and irritation of oral mucosa.  Taken together, these effects contribute to the development of periodontal disease, one of the most common dental disorders.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of ozone therapy conducted with the use of the generator producing ozone under effect of ultraviolet radiation for the treatment of periodontitis in musicians-instrumentalists.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 42 musicians presenting with the diagnosis of periodontitis who were divided into two groups depending on the severity of the disease.
Group 1 was comprised of the subjects with mild periodontitis while group 2 consisted of the musicians having periodontitis of moderate severity.
All the participants in the study remained under observation over 6 months during which they were treated by ozone therapy.
The results of the treatment were estimated immediately after the onset of therapy as well as within the next 3 and 6 months.
The variance analysis with the use of Student's t-test was employed for the statistical treatment of the data obtained.
RESULTS
The study has demonstrate that ozone therapy resulted in the reduction of inflammation and normalization of local blood circulation in the periodontal tissues; moreover, it extended and lengthened the periods of remission and stabilization of the process of recovery.
CONCLUSION
The results of the study are of primary importance for the maintenance of oral cavity health in musicians-instrumentalists which is indispensable for the maintenance of their successful professional activity.
