[Ophthalmoferon efficacy in the treatment of children with chronic blepharoconjunctivitis].
AIM
To study possibilities of using the medication Ophthalmoferon in the treatment of children with chronic allergic and Demodex blepharoconjunctivitis.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
We examined 40 children (80 eyes) aged 3 to 17 years with chronic allergic (group I) and Demodex (group II) blepharoconjunctivitis.
Each group was divided into two subgroups ('A' and 'B') respectively based on the treatment regimen used.  Subgroup 'A' patients received Ophtalmoferon instillations (four times per day for four weeks) in addition to the standard therapy, whereas subgroup 'B' patients got only basic treatment of blepharoconjunctivitis.
The latter included eyelids' ciliary edge massage, eyelids' free edge hygienic treatment, artificial tears instillations and oral intake of the medications, like enterosorbents, probiotics, enzymes and anti-allergic remedies.
We evaluated the dynamics of subjective and objective blepharoconjunctivitis signs at 1,2,4 and 6 follow-up weeks.  The dynamics of eosinophils content in cytograms as well as the dynamics of acarograms were also assessed.
RESULTS
From the first treatment week in all patients, regardless of the treatment regimen used, we noted a statistically significant positive change in all subjective and the majority of objective blepharoconjunctivitis clinical manifestations, such as eyelids' edge and conjunctiva hyperemia and eyelid swelling.
In patients with allergic and Demodex blepharoconjunctivitis, who received the medication Ophtalmoferon, a significantly more positive result was observed after the first treatment week, by comparing with the control group (p<0,01).  The significant difference in the parameters of both comparison subgroups persisted for two weeks.
There was a significant difference in the acarogram values, when Ophtalmoferon was used.  A further decrease in the cellular infiltration of the conjunctiva by eosinophils was revealed in patients, who additionally used Ophthalmoferon, but without significant differences in parameters.
There were no adverse effects in all cases, when the given medication was used.
CONCLUSION
Our study results allow us to recommend the medication Ophtalmoferon for a wide clinical use in children with chronic allergic and Demodex blepharoconjunctivitis.
