[The role of local immunotherapy in the treatment of the patients presenting with virus-associated allergic rhinitis].  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the clinical effectiveness of intranasal immunotherapy with the use of сycloferon in the patients presenting with seasonal virus-associated allergic rhinitis during the period of pollination.
The results of the treatment of 50 patients with virus-associated allergic rhinitis (i.e. those allergic to the sagebrush pollen) were analyzed.  The patients were divided into two groups depending on the therapeutic modality being used.  Those comprising the main group (21 patients) received immunotherapy with сycloferon in addition to allergen-specific immunotherapy (by sublingual administration).  A cycloferon solution in the physiological saline (2:1) at a concentration of 125 mg/ml was applied to the intranasal mucous membrane with the use of a nebulizer.
The inhalation was performed every other day as a course of 10 procedures at a total cycloferon dose of 1250 mg.
The control group was composed of 29 patients given sublingual allergen-specific immunotherapy alone.
The study included the evaluation of the patients' quality of life in accordance with the adapted and modified RQLQ questionnaire.  In addition, the demand for other relevant medications following the course of intranasal immunotherapy was determined by analyzing the data extracted from the self-monitoring diaries and questionnaires.
The study has shown that the inclusion of сycloferon therapy in the scheme for the management of the patients presenting with virus-associated allergic rhinitis during the period of pollination enhanced the effectiveness of the treatment as assessed from the improvement of the patients' quality of life that correlated with the reduction in the severity of rhino-conjunctival manifestations of the disease (r= -0.4, p<0.05).
It is concluded that the intranasal administration of the immunomodulator сycloferon has resulted in a significant decrease of requirements for chromones (p<0.001) and antihistamines (p<0.05) among the patients suffering from allergic rhinitis.
