[Endometrial dysfunction caused by chronic endometritis: сlinical and morphological aspects].  AIM
to determine the clinical and morphological aspects of endometrial dysfunction caused by chronic endometritis (CE).  SUBJECTS AND METHODS
The study included 239 reproductive-aged patients: 93 were examined for abnormal uterine bleeding; 37 patients of them had a history of miscarriage and secondary infertility, 17 patients had primary infertility (Group 1).  The remaining 105 patients with infertility were examined for future in vitro fertilization (Group 2).
A comparison group consisted of 41 patients with normal menstrual cycles and reproductive function across the cycle, who had separate diagnostic curettage before forthcoming surgery for uterine myoma.
All the women in Groups 1 and 2 underwent standard clinical and morphological investigations, histopathological examination of the material obtained during hysteroscopy with separate diagnostic curettage (Group 1), and aspiration biopsy (Group 2) with the sections being stained with hematoxylin and eosin and by Mallory's method.
Immunohistochemical diagnosis was used to assess endometrial receptivity to steroid hormones and glycodelin.
Antibodies against CD4, СD8, and CD20 were employed to study local immunity.
RESULTS
In Group 1, 52 (55.9%) of the 93 patients admitted to hospital for abnormal uterine bleeding were found to have CE on the basis of a morphopathological examination of the material after separate diagnostic study.
In Group 2, CE was established in 59 (56.9%) of the 105 patients after postmortem examination.
The patients with CE had a history of reproductive significant infections, such as Chlamydia, Trichomonas, Ureaplasma Mycoplasma, cytomegalovirus, papillomavirus infections, genital herpes, genital candidiasis, and bacterial vaginosis.
The CE groups showed functional disorders of the endometrial glandular and surface epithelium.
In the middle stage of proliferation, the expression of glycodelin in the glandular epithelial cells was detected to be moderate to strong in 83.3%.
During the periovulatory period, no secretion of glycodelin is of fundamental importance for the regulation of reproductive function because this protein has contraceptive activity, by blocking the binding of sperm to the zona pellucida.
Accordingly, endometrial glycodelin production during the proliferative phase, which has been identified by the authors in patients with CE, may be one of the pathogenic mechanisms for the development of infertility.
In addition, the patients in Groups 1 and 2 compared with those in the comparison group were noted to have a decrease in CD4 cell counts with a simultaneous increase in CD8 expression and a reduction in CD20 levels, especially in Group 2.
CONCLUSION
The patients with SE were identified to have endometrial dysfunction characterized by lower reception to steroid hormones, impairment in glycodelin secretion, retardation in the development of pinopods and in the phase of the menstrual cycle, and local immunity disorders.
The above endometrial changes should be taken into account in the pregravid preparation of patients with CE.
