[Clinical presentation of Ixodes tick-borne borreliosis caused by Borrelia miyamotoi in the context of an immune response to the pathogen].  Ixodes tick-borne borreliosis caused by Borrelia miyamotoi (ITBB-BM) is a previously unknown infectious disease discovered in Russia.
AIM  The present study continues the investigation of the clinical features of ITBB-BM in the context of an immune system-pathogen interaction.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS  The study enrolled 117 patients with ITBB-BM and a comparison group of 71 patients with Lyme disease (LD) that is ITBB with erythema migrans.
All the patients were treated at the New Hospital, Yekateringburg.
More than 100 clinical, epidemiological and laboratory parameters were obtained from each patient's medical history and included in the general database.  A subset of patients hospitalized in 2015 and 2016 underwent additional laboratory examinations.
Namely, the levels of B. miyamotoi-specific IgM and IgG antibodies were measured by the protein microarray containing GlpQ protein and four variable major proteins (VMPs): Vlp15/16, Vlp18, Vsp1, and Vlp5.  The blood concentration of Borrelia was estimated by quantitative real-time PCR.
RESULTS
In contrast to LD, first of all (p<0.001) the following clinical features were typical for ITBB-BM: the absence of erythema migrans (in 95% of patients), fever (93%), fatigue (96%), headache (82%), chill (41%), nausea (28%), lymphopenia (56%), thrombocytopenia (46%), the abnormal levels of alanine aminotransferase (54%) and C-reactive protein (98%), proteinuria (61%).
Given the set of these indicators, the course of ITBB-BM was more severe in approximately 70% of patients.
At admission, only 13% and 38% of patients had antibodies to GlpQ and VMPs, respectively; at discharge, antibodies to GlpQ and VMPs were detected in 88% of patients.
There was no statistically significant association of the antibody response with individual clinical manifestations and laboratory parameters of the disease.  However, patients with more severe ITBB-BM produced less IgM antibodies to VMPs and GlpQ at the time of discharge.
CONCLUSION
ITBB-BM is a moderate systemic disease accompanied by the production of specific antibodies in virtually all patients.
