[Regional ophthalmological cluster as a resource basis for the process and the procedure of specialist accreditation].
Since 2016, phased introduction of specialist accreditation has been launched.  Many issues like how training at regional accreditation centers (RACs) should be organized - for applicants applying for primary specialized accreditation as residents in ophthalmology (2018) or periodic accreditation as practicing ophthalmologists (2021) - are yet debatable.
AIM  to provide organizational and educational resources for arranging accreditation of ophthalmologists at the background of improving the quality of medical care in a federal subject of the Russian Federation.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study object was the process and the procedure of accreditation, the study subject - the system of specialist accreditation.
METHODS  bibliographical, analytical, and expert.
Methodological basis for tasks solving: mobilization of an independent organizational structure, that is, the regional ophthalmological scientific-educational cluster (ROSEC).
RESULTS
Three complex problems have been defined that require solution.
1. Discrepancies between accreditation procedures depending on the type of accreditation.
The absence of practical skills assessment within the periodical accreditation procedure and low availability of innovative simulation systems impede the achievement of the declared goals of accreditation.
2. The absence of a clear order and criteria for portfolio assessment as well as a legal format of its formation during non-interrupted medical education (NIME) demands active management.
3. There is still a lack of appropriate organizational, educational, material technical, and personnel support of the accreditation system.
The proposed organizational and methodological approaches are aimed at solving issues of accreditation support, proper functioning of RACs, and improving the quality and regional availability of NIME.
CONCLUSION
Systematic approach effectively solves the problem of resource support of accreditation.
ROSEC should be regarded as the provision basis for complex of all stages of ophthalmologist accreditation and proper functioning of RACs.
ROSEC involvement is highly advisable.
