[The compliance of elderly women being at the social institution.]  The aim of the work is to analyze the prevalence and severity of the psychological characteristics of the compliance of elderly women being at the social institution in comparison with the same age group living in the family and receiving support from relatives.
The experimental group of the research consisted of 27 women at the age of 70-79 years being at the social institution, named Regional State Autonomous Institution Social Welfare «Sedankinsky nursing house for the disabled and aged people» of Vladivostok, from 6 to 12 months.  As well as the comparative group included 27 women at the age of 72-79 years, who became widowed and lived in families.
The following psychodiagnostic techniques were used in the research: Questionnaire «The level of compliance», the technique of diagnostics of psychological well-being of the individual, Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS).  The results of this study showed that the low level of general, emotional, behavioral and social compliance dominated in the group of the elderly women, who lived in the nursing house, in comparison with the group of the elderly women living in families.
Besides, the level of psychological well-being is below normal combined with a raised level of depression.  In the group living in favorable social conditions, viz. in families, the level of general compliance is average.
Furthermore, the level of psychological well-being is characterized as one with better focus on building emotionally close relations combined with a sense of meaningfulness of life.  The level of depression in the comparative group is significantly lower, than in the experimental group.
The achieved characteristics show the necessity of increasing a compliance level of the patients living in the social institutions by carrying out a set of measures to optimize the conditions and quality of physician-patient interaction.  Moreover, it is important not only to teach them to take medicine systematically, but also to take an active deliberate position on their own health care.
