[The modular strategy for the informational support of medical activities based at the spa and health resort facilities under conditions of infrastructure deficit].  The Crimean peninsula, by virtue of its unique geographical conditions, has a variety of natural resources providing a basis for the maintenance of the health resort activities in the region.
However, most local health centers suffer from the chronic and difficultly avoidable in the short term problems with logistical support, including the shortage of computers and the lack of modern network infrastructure.
This circumstance limits the deployment capabilities of high-grade medical information systems for the automation of all components of the activity of health resorts and the significant improvement of the performance of other aspects of their work, such as efficient patient routing, workflow optimization, limiting the opportunities for the realization of certain corruption schemes by the staff.
We have studied the routing of patients and the associated document flow in a number of Crimean spa and health resort facilities (sanatoriums).  As a result, the basic work places at which information contained in the documents is undergoing changes were identified.
Based on these data, the basic (modular) concept of the development of medical information system was formulated.  According to the principle of modularity, the structure of the information system has been modified and optimized.
The stages of implementation of this approach at various levels of logistic facilities were described, defined and justified.  The key feature of the proposed system consists in that even the minimal equipment of computing infrastructure units (starting from a single workplace, such as a «medical receptionist») may be sufficient to achieve the significant degree of automation in the workflow, provide monitoring and analysis of the medical records of the spa and health resort facilities.
By gradually increasing the number of related automated workplaces and modules, it is possible to expand the capabilities of the system up to the full automation of a given health resort facility.
