[The experimental evaluation of the protective effect of the extract of the cyclodextrin-containing phytotherapeutic composition on the development of osteoporosis].  OBJECTIVE
The relevance of the problem considered in the present communication arises to-day from the widespread prevalence of osteoporosis (OP), the rather low effectiveness of the methods currently available for the treatment of this condition, and iatrogenic effects of its medication therapy.
The great diversity of phytotherapeutic modalities of traditional medicine are is only poorly supported by the results of the scientific studies results; moreover, most of them are coming from the foreign literature publications.  AIM
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the influence of the phytotherapeutic preparation (Phytocost) having cyclodextrin in its composition on the restoration of the cartilaginous and bony tissues based on the experimental research with the use of the OP experimental model.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The experimental studies were performed on 5 month-old Balb/c mice used as the prednisolone-induced osteoporosis model.  The animals were divided into four study groups according to the daily doses administered to them: 0.005; 0.05; 0.5 and 5.0 mg/mouse during 30 days and 3 control groups: intact, 14 and 30 days after prednisolone administration, naïve mice.
RESULTS
The study has demonstrated the dose-dependent protective effect of cyclodextrin-containing Phytocost.
The most pronounced effect in the form of reduction of osteoblast number and the increase in the number of osteocytes was obtained at a Phytocost dose of 0.5 mg/mouse.
No undesirable adverse reactions were documented during the study.
CONCLUSION
The domestically produced Phytocost composition differs from its foreign analogues in that it contains a significantly greater number of constituent components because the ultimate goal of the study was to create a medication acting on all currently known mechanisms of OP pathogenesis, whereas our Chinese colleagues proceed from the ancient knowledge gained by traditional medicine that it is sometimes difficult to understand and explain in the light of the modern concepts.
All the plants used as raw materials for Phytocost production grow at the territory of the Russian Federation which provides the possibilities for the efficient import substitution of the components necessary for the manufacture of the preparation in question.
