[The therapeutic and recreational potential of the «Goryachy Plyazh» physiotherapeutic facility on the Kunashir island].  The ever increasing attention to the further development of the health resort business and touristic activities in this country implies the necessity of the proper scientifically sound substantiation for the more efficient exploitation of the available spa and health resort resources of the Russian Far East as well as the ample recreational potential of this region taking into consideration that they have not been completely utilized during the preceding period.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the of the «Goryachy Plyazh (Hot Beach)» physiotherapeutic facility on the Kunashir island.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
We have studies the chemical, bacteriological, and radiological properties of thermal waters from the natural sources located in the vicinity of the «Goryachy Plyazh» physiotherapeutic facility.
The medical potential of the area was assessed in accordance with the methodological guidelines №96/226 on drawing up the bioclimatic passport approved by the Ministry of Public Health of the Russian Federation on the 7thFebruary of 1997.
RESULTS
We have proposed the aggregate indicator of the therapeutic and recreational potential making it possible to evaluate the totality of health-improving properties in the combination with the landscape and climatic characteristics of the locality of interest.
The neighbourhood of the «Goryachy Plyazh» physiotherapeutic facility on the Kunashir island was found to harbour the sources of mineral waters of various types.
Specifically, siliceous thermal waters of varying ionic composition (e.g. containing chlorides, sodium, silicium, and boron) of the Omsk and Ursdon types are suitable for multipurpose therapeutic utilization including the protracted internal application for the treatment of chronic gastritis and other intestinal problems, diseases of liver and endocrine system, as well as metabolic disorders.
Mineral water of the Kul'dursky type can be used for the external use in the form of bathing and other hydrotherapeutic procedures for the management and prevention of the diseases of various dermatoses, the diseases of the nervous, musculoskeletal, and genitourinary systems.
CONCLUSION
The results of the study give evidence of the ample aggregate therapeutic and recreational potential of the localities in the neighbourhood of the «Goryachy Plyazh» physiotherapeutic facility located on the Kunashir island amounting to 76.5% which suggests the very promising prospects for the further development and utilization of this territory for the health resort business and touristic activities.
