[The marketing evaluation of the consumers' preference as regards the use of medicinal and medicinal table mineral waters].  The development of modern technologies in physiotherapy with the use of mineral waters, the expansion of the assortment of the medicinal and medicinal table waters as well as increasing the competitive advantages of domestic products require the more extensive marketing survey of the consumers' preferences in the market of mineral waters.
AIM  The objective of the present study was the marketing evaluation of the consumers' preference in the segment of medicinal and medicinal table mineral waters in the city of Moscow.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The survey involved 697 consumers of medicinal and medicinal table mineral waters.
The sampling was carried out by the deterministic quota method.
The field research was conducted by means of personal verbal interviews (32%) and the CATI to Web method (phone recruiting and on-line questioning) (68%) with the use of the structured questionnaire.
Positioning was carried out making use of the two-dimensional schematic map and scoring assessment on an individual basis with calculation of integrated indicators.
RESULTS
The marketing evaluation has demonstrated that the principal motive for purchasing mineral waters in more than 40% of respondents was the treatment and prevention of various diseases including disturbances in the urogenital system as well as digestive and respiratory disorders that appear to be the most frequent reasons for the consumption of mineral waters.
The main factors that form the preferences of the consumers as regards the use of a concrete variety of mineral waters were elucidated.
Of crucial importance for approximately 40% of the consumers (p<0.01) proved to be their health condition, the medical indications, and the available information about the therapeutic effectiveness of one or another type of mineral waters.
Other factors were the quality of mineral water, its cost, the manufacturer and/or place of production, the attractiveness of the packaging, etc.
CONCLUSION
The evaluation of the positioning of the mineral water consumers' preferences made it possible to identify the most preferable products in the group of medicinal mineral waters and in the group of medicinal table mineral waters.
The mechanisms governing the formation of the consumers' preferences as regards the use of various mineral waters have been clarified in the course of the present study.
