[The comparative analysis of the influence of the supervised exercise training and home-based exercise training on the psychological status of the following coronary artery bypass grafting].  This article was designed to report the results of the comparative analysis of the influence of the home-based exercise training (HBT) and the supervised exercise training in the form of the controlled training (CVT) under conditions of outpatient rehabilitative treatment on the patients' quality of life (QoL) and psychological status (including manifestations of anxiety and depression) following coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG).
AIM
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the consequences of the application of different programs of physical rehabilitation under the outpatient conditions on the psychoemotional status and quality of life of the patients who had undergone coronary artery bypass grafting.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A total of 114 male patients suffering from coronary artery disease (CAD) who had undergone CABG were available for the examination.
All the patients were allocated to three groups.  Group 1 was comprised of the patients (n=36) treated with the use of the supervised cycling training (SCT) while group 2 consisted of the patients who had to perform home-based walking training (HBWT) (n=36). The group of comparison included 42 patients.
The psychophysiological assessment was carried out based on the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI) and the Spielberger-Hanin Personal and Reactive Anxiety Scale.
The quality of life (QoL) was assessed with the use of the SF-36 questionnaire.  All the patients were examined prior to surgery, 1.4 months and 1 year after CABG.
RESULTS
The study has demonstrated the most pronounced improvement in the quality of life of the patients following the 3-month supervised cycling training after CABG that was manifested as the decrease of anxiety and depression.
The minimal changes in the psychological and emotional status were documented in the absence of any exercise training integrated into the postoperative rehabilitation program.
Only the moderate improvement of QoL was observed in the patients treated with the application of the 3-month home-based walking training program after CABG.
The positive effects of the three-month exercise training were evened out within 1 year after its initiation.
DISCUSSION
It has been shown that the effectiveness of HBT is somewhat lower than that of CVT in terms of the influence on the psychoemotional status of the patients following CABG.
This finding is at variance with the results reported by the foreign authors and should provide a basis for the enhancement of the effectiveness of the post-CABG rehabilitation programs to be implemented under conditions of the medical facilities, their principal objective being the education of the patients in safe and efficient methods for the pots-surgical self-rehabilitation with the emphasis placed on the measures intended for the improvement of the approaches to monitoring the compliance of the patients with the prescribed recommendations and for increasing their motivation to observe as long as possible the advices given by the health care professionals.
CONCLUSION
The home-based walking training of moderate intensity provides a safe, easy to perform, and readily available tool for a large number of patients who underwent coronary artery bypass grafting even though it is somewhat less effective than the supervised cycling training.
The effects of both rehabilitation modalities are rather short-term.
