AIM  to investigate the myocardial expression of some structural proteins and markers of cellular proliferation and innate immunity for assessing their possible diagnostic and prognostic role in patients with chronic myocarditis.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS
The investigation enrolled 23 patients  (16 men; mean age, 52.0±12.4 years (range, 27 to 73) with various forms of noncoronarogenic myocardial injury who underwent right ventricular endomyocardial biopsy (n=4), intraoperative left ventricular biopsy (n=17) or autopsy (n=2).
Prior to their morphological examination, the patients were divided into two groups: 1) 10 patients with dilated cardiomyopathy and presumptive myocarditis; 2) 13 patients with valvular heart disease, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, myxoma, and chronic pulmonary thromboembolism, presumptively without myocarditis.
Along with myocardial histological and immunohistochemical (IHC) examinations, the expression of vimentin, desmin, c-kit, Ki-67, and Toll-like receptors (TLR) 2 and 9 was determined.
Polymerase chain reaction was used to identify whether herpes viruses of and parvovirus B19 genomes were present in the blood and myocardial samples; indirect ELISA was applied to estimate the blood level of antibodies against various cardiac antigens.
RESULTS
According to the histological findings, active/borderline lymphocytic myocarditis was diagnosed in all the patients (Group 1) and in 6 patients (Group 2) in conjunction with the underlying disease (only in 9 and 7 patients, respectively), viral genome was detected in the myocardium of 15 patients, including in 5 without morphological signs of myocarditis (parvovirus B19 (n=11), herpesvirus 6 (n=4), herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2 (n=1), Epstein-Barr virus (n=2), and cytomegalovirus (n=1)), and in the blood (n=4).
A marked correlation was found between TLR2 and TLR9 expressions and the morphological pattern of active myocarditis in the absence of this correlation with the expression level of other studied markers.
The expression level of TLR2 in patients with and without borderline myocarditis was 0 [0; 0,75] and in those with active myocarditis was 1.5 [1; 1,5] points; that of TLR9 was 2 [2; 2] and 4 [3; 4] points, respectively (p<0.001).
The expression of TLR2 and TLR9 in patients with borderline myocarditis was lower than in those without myocarditis (0 [0; 0] versus 0 [0; 1] and 2 [1,5; 2] versus 2 [2; 3] points), which can reflect cardiomyocyte destruction/depletion at later stages of the disease.
There was also a close correlation between the expression level of TLR2 and that of TLR9 (r=0.824; p<0.001) and with Ki-67 levels (r=-0.531 and r=-0.702; p<0.01).
There was also a correlation of the expression of the studied markers with viral persistence (desmin), the degree of myocardial dysfunction and cardiosclerosis (c-kit), which calls for further investigations.
CONCLUSION
Determination of the myocardial expression level of TLR2 and TLR9 may serve as an immunohistochemical marker for myocarditis and preservation of its activity, which is especially valuable in patients with borderline forms.
The marked expression of these markers for innate immunity may reflect both one of the mechanisms of genetic predisposition to myocarditis and its severe course and their secondary activation in the pathogenesis of the disease and is a potential target of therapy.
