[Co-administration of intranasally delivered insulin and proinsulin C-peptide to rats with the types 1 and 2 diabetes mellitus restores their metabolic parameters.]  The C-peptide, the product of proinsulin proteolysis, not only is a signal molecule, but also, forming a complex with insulin, is able to modulate the signaling functions of insulin.
The signaling systems sensitive to insulin in the hypothalamus and other brain areas are among the targets of insulin.
We hypothesized that in systemic deficiency of insulin and C-peptide in the type 1 diabetes mellitus (DM) and in severe forms of the type 2 DM, the increase in the level of C-peptide in the CNS will improve central effects of insulin, including its influence on peripheral metabolism.
To verify this, the influence of separate and co-administration of intranasal insulin (II) and C-peptide (IP) on their metabolic parameters and sensitivity to insulin in rats with acute and mild type 1 DM induced by the treatment with streptozotocin at the doses of 60 and 35 mg/kg and in rats with neonatal type 2 DM corresponding to severe long-term form of type 2 DM in human was studied.
The treatment of animals with II and IP was carried out for 7 days in the daily doses of 20 and 10 μg/rat, respectively.  The co-administration of II and IP leading to an increase of insulin and C-peptide levels in the brain was most effective.
In rats with type 1 DM treated with the combination of II plus IP, hyperglycemia was decreased and weight loss was prevented.  In rats with type 2 DM, co-administration of II and IP led to the normalization of glucose homeostasis and the increase in insulin sensitivity, as shown by glucose-tolerance and insulin-glucose tolerance tests, and to improvement of lipid metabolism, as demonstrated by the decrease in the atherogenic index.
The effectiveness of monotherapy with II was lower than in the case of a combination of II+IP, while monotherapy with C-peptide had little effect on the indicators studied.
Thus, the simultaneous increase of insulin and C-peptide levels in the brain in the conditions of their deficiency in diabetic pathology can be considered as one of the promising approaches to restore the central insulin-dependent regulation of peripheral metabolism and to improve the utilization of glucose in different forms of DM.
