[Inflammatory factors and immunophenotypes in adjustment disorders].
AIM  To identify inflammatory and autoimmune markers (enzymatic activity of leukocyte elastase (LE), functional α1-proteinase inhibitor (α1-PI), the level of autoantibodies to neurospecific antigens S100b and myelin basic protein (MBP)) as well as phagocytic activity of blood neutrophils of patients with disorders of adaptation, to determine certain immunophenotypes and analyze their possible relationships with disease characteristics.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 40 patients with adaptation disorders, mostly women.  Diagnostic evaluation and clinical qualification of patients was carried out in accordance with ICD-10: 'Adjustment disorder' (F43.2).
The control group consisted of 23 individuals matched for age and sex with patients.  The activity of LE and α1-PI was determined by spectrophotometry, and the levels of autoantibodies to S100b and MBP by ELISA, phagocytic activity by the absorptive capacity of neutrophils of peripheral blood of melamine-formaldehyde latex particles.
RESULTS
In the total group of patients with adaptation disorders, increased enzymatic activity of LE and functional α1-PI was shown compared to controls (p<0.001 and p<0.0001, respectively).  There were no differences in the level of autoantibodies to neuroantigens, and changes in phagocytic index (PhN) compared with the control, however the tendency to reduction of phagocytic number (PhN) was observed.
Patients were stratified by leading psychopathological symptoms (predominance of asthenic-depressive or anxious-depressive symptoms, polymorphic symptomatology) and by immunophenotype: (A) inflammatory markers - in the range of control values, (B) - the increase compared to the control activity of both LE and α1-PI, (C) preferential increase in the activity of α1-PI only.  The frequency of these immunophenotypes was similar within each of the clinical subgroups.
CONCLUSION
The results suggest the involvement of inflammation in the pathogenesis of adjustment disorders due to stress factors.  Various immunological variants differed by proportion of inflammatory markers were not associated with clinical symptoms.
