BACKGROUND  the creation of the efficient system of the spa and health resort-based health care for the population of the entire territory of the Russian Federation requires the systematic evaluation and protection of the natural resources of country as a basis for the further development of the health resort and recreation facilities in different regions.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to estimate the possibilities of expansion of the health resort and recreational activities based on the rational exploitation of the natural resources of the medical-recreational and balneotherapeutic areas of the Krasnoyarsk Territory.
METHODS
The inspection of the medical-recreational and balneotherapeutic regions of the southern part of the Krasnoyarsk Territory with the evaluation of the medicinal and raw materials resources of the spa and health resort facilities located in this area.
The comprehensive assessment of the landscape and climatic conditions of the territory was performed in compliance with the methodological recommendations No 96/226 «The bioclimatic passport of the medical-recreational and balneotherapeutic region» approved by the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation as of 7 February 1997.  The quality of water bodies/sources was carried out in conformity with the criteria envisaged by the methodological recommendations No 96/225 «Quality and safety control of mineral waters based on their chemical and microbiological characteristics» approved by the Ministry of Health of the Russian Federation as of 7 April 1997.
Water typing was performed in accordance with GOST R 54316-2011 «Natural drinking mineral waters».
RESULTS  The medical-recreational and balneotherapeutic regions in southern part of the Krasnoyarsk Territory are notable for the great variety of mountainous, forest and steppe landscape forms with their favorable bioclimatic conditions and unique resources of therapeutic muds and mineral carbonic waters.
The area is characterized by the great potential for the further development of the climatic spa and health resort facilities, and the improvement of the health care service for both children's and adult populations based on the rational use of the local landscape and climatic factors available at the territories occupied by the spa and health resort facilities of the balneotherapeutic profile.  The prospects for the further expansion of medical and recreational tourism are discussed.
CONCLUSIONS
This article was designed to systematize the available data characterizing the balneotherapeutic and recreational conditions of the medical-recreational regions of the southern part of the Krasnoyarsk Territory with special reference to the value of their natural resources, such as bioclimate, mineral waters, therapeutic muds, etc., for their inclusion in the registry of the areas possessed of the great health-improving potential based on the rational nature use and environmental management programs.
