[Alternating pneumocompression - effective physiotherapeutic method for the prevention of venous thromboembolic complications in patients of medium and high risk in the acute period of the stroke].  BACKGROUND
the patients presenting with severe post-stroke in the acute period of this condition are characterized by the high risk of venous thromboembolic complications (VTEC), with the most dangerous of them being pulmonary embolism that makes an appreciable contribution to the mortality rate of such patients at the hospital stage of their treatment.  Among the physical methods for the prevention of VTE, such as wearing graduated compression stockings (GCS), myoelectrostimulation (MES), pneumatic intermittent compression (PIC), only the latter technique has been shown to be efficient when applied for the treatment of surgical patients during the post-stroke period with the level of evidence 2B and the very uncertain parameters of the impact.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the advantages of the PIC in comparison with that of GCS and MES, substantiate the choice of the former method for the management of the high-risk post-stroke patients, and determine the impact parameters of PIC during the peracute and acute periods of the disease.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
We conducted a series of analyses of the results of several controlled randomized studies and relevant reviews of the literature with a view to determining the feasibility and effectiveness of application of one or another approach and clarifying the parameters of the exposure to GCS, MES, and PIC for the prevention of VTEC.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The results of these studies gave evidence that the effectiveness of the GCS and MES is insufficient in contrast to that of PIC that was found to decrease the relative risk of deep vein thrombosis (DVT) by 62% compared with placebo and by 47% in comparison with GCS.  The low risk of DVT associated with the application of PIC was apparent from the low OR value of 0.45 and the absolute reduction in the risk of DVT by 3.6%.
The analysis of the parameters being used made it possible to identify side effects and thereby allowed to formulate the optimal method for the application of PIC for the purpose of prevention of VTEC in the post-stroke patients during the peracute and acute periods of the disease.
CONCLUSION
Only PIC of all the currently available methods for the physical prevention of VTEC in the group of high risk post-stroke patients during the peracute and acute periods of this condition can be practiced in the reliable evidence-based manner.
The most rational PIC modality consists of exerting the external pressure on the lower extremities within the first 12-24 hours after stroke with the use of the cuffs of the «lower leg» type  (i.e. at a pressure of 40-50 mm Hg in the wave mode with memorization for the multi-sectional cuffs, daily in the continuous manner throughout the daytime till the patient is downgraded to the group at lower risk of VTEC or actually till the discharge from the hospital.
