[The principal and auxiliary immunohistochemical markers of intravital mechanical strangulation asphyxia].  The objective of the present study was the evaluation of the auxiliary methods for the diagnostics of the intravital formation of the constriction marks; the secondary objective was to determine the pace at which the death and asphyxia occur.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The materials on which the study was based included 17 cases of mechanical strangulation asphyxia involving 13 men and 4 women at the age from 8 to 28 years.
All cases of hanging were associated with different blood alcohol levels.  Their characteristic feature was the formation of the obliquely ascending constriction marks.
The group of comparison was comprised of three cases of death by drowning and one case of manual strangulation.
The control group consisted of 10 patients who died from the acute form of coronary heart disease and 5 cases of death from traumatic shock.
All the corpses were examined with the use of the traditional methods within the first 24 hours after death.
The special laboratory studies were performed by means of the standard histological and immunohistochemical methods with the use of the polyclonal antibodies against total cytokeratin, fibrinogen, immunoglobulin-lambda, fibronectin, and CD-117 antigen.
The histological preparations were stained by the method of Spielmeyer and with toluidine blue.
RESULTS
The results of the study give evidence of the possibility of diagnostics of mechanical strangulation asphyxia making use of the reaction with anti-fibrinogen antibodies in the stromal tissue of the constriction mark even in the absence of other intravital signs of death.  Such diagnostics is also possible with the use of the CD-117 antigen in the pulmonary tissue.
The expression of this antigen is characteristic of the cases of alveolar hypoxia.
The possibility of application of other markers for the differential diagnostics of mechanical strangulation asphyxia from other causes of death is discussed.
