[Aspects of the importance of postoperative hepatoprotector therapy in urgent surgery].  The purpose of this study was to determine the effect on the effectiveness of the correction of enteric insufficiency syndrome in patients with urgent surgical pathology included in the scheme of complex therapy Remaxol.
The results of complex therapy of 227 patients (98 people with common peritonitis and 129 patients with acute intestinal obstruction) were analyzed. 128 patients of the main group in the postoperative period were included in the therapy scheme Remaxol: intravenously drip in a daily dose of 400 ml at a rate of 40 drops per minute, a course of -5 days.
Patients of the control group (99 people) received standard treatment.
The study is devoted to the role of postoperative hepatoprotective therapy in the treatment of patients with urgent surgical pathology.  The main attention is paid to the hepatoenteric link of the pathogenesis of polyorganism insufficiency.
This approach gives hope for a reduction in the risk of abdominal sepsis and a reduction in mortality among patients with acute abdominal pathology.  The study found that in patients with acute abdominal pathology, an increase in the severity of enteric insufficiency syndrome due to toxic aggression and bacterial translocation can lead to hepatic dysfunction.
Consequently, the implementation of hepatoprotective therapy is a pathogenetic link in the complex treatment of urgent surgical patients.  The obtained results allowed to draw a number of conclusions.
In particular, it has been established that the use of hepatoprotective therapy in the complex medical treatment of patients with acute abdominal pathology makes it possible to stop hepatorenal syndrome by the 5th day, and the syndrome of enteric insufficiency by the 7th day.
Earlier relief of hepatic dysfunction and enteral insufficiency syndrome due to hepatoprotective therapy allowed to reduce the incidence of infectious complications to 9.7%, to reduce the lethality to 9.4% and to shorten hospitalization from 17.29 to 1.734 to 12.14±1.385 bed/day.
