AIM  To improve diagnosis and surgical outcomes in patients with ruptured popliteal artery aneurysm.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Eight patients with ruptured popliteal artery aneurysm have undergone surgery for the period from 1999 to 2015 at the Vascular Surgery Department of Sklifosovsky Research Institute for Emergency Care.
Incidence of rupture was 2.9% from total number of popliteal artery aneurysm.  7 patients with rupture had signs of lower limb ischemia
(acute form grade I in 2 (25%) cases, grade IIA in 1 (12.5%), grade IIB in 1 (12.5%) case, chronic ischemia grade IIB in 2 (25%) patients, grade III in 1 (12.5%) patient).  1 (12,5%) patient had not lower limb ischemia.
Preoperatively all patients underwent sonography of lower limb arteries and soft tissues, computed tomography of the same structures was carried out in 3 patients, 5 patients underwent subtraction digital angiography.
Presence and dimensions of soft tissues hematoma, arterial perfusion proximally and distally to popliteal artery, aneurysms of contralateral limb and other localizations were assessed.
RESULTS
Amputations after surgical repair were absent in 6 patients.
Five patients were discharged with patent graft, completely compensated blood flow and primary healing of postoperative wound.
Severe postoperative complications followed by amputation occurred in 2 patients.
One patient died with reperfusion syndrome, hematoma and graft infection, sepsis.
CONCLUSION
1) Ruptured popliteal artery aneurysm is extremely rare complication, however it is a formidable event with high risk of amputation and death.  2) Early diagnosis of popliteal artery aneurysm and surgical treatment prior to embolism, thrombosis and rupture are necessary to prevent formidable complications.
3) Timely detection of aneurysms and their complications by general practitioners is extremely low due to rarity and specificity of the disease, presence of various symptoms.
It is necessary to popularize knowledge about this disease among general practitioners.  4) Sonography is screening method for differential diagnosis.
5) CT-angiography or subtraction angiography are advisable to assess distal perfusion if patient's state is stable without severe ischemia.
6) Aneurysm repair with popliteal artery replacement should be performed in early period after rupture in order to reduce time of ischemia and to prevent infection of hematoma in view of ischemia and anemia.
