[Combined rehabilitation in the patients presenting with dorsopathies of the lumbar spine and concomitant irritable bowel syndrome based at a therapeutic clinic].  BACKGROUND
Comorbidity constitutes a serious challenge for rehabilitative medicine.  The comorbidity of the dorsopathy of the lumbar spine and irritable bowel syndrome mutually complicates the clinical course of both conditions, significantly reduces the patients' quality of life. and increases the costs of diagnostic procedures and restoration of the working capacity.
The approaches to the non-pharmacological management of the patients presenting with these diseases remain to be developed.
AIMS
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed combined non-medicinal rehabilitation modality which included a course of therapy with the application of modulated sinusoidal currents, total wrappings with the use of a Rapan saline solution, and sedative inhalations additionally introduced into the basic medicinal therapy of the patients presenting with dorsopathy of the lumbar spine combined with irritable bowel syndrome in the stationary phase.  MATERIALS AND METHODS
A total of 59 patients at the age from 20 to 65 years suffering from dorsopathy of the lumbar spine and concomitant irritable bowel syndrome were examined and treated.  All the patients were randomized into two groups, the main (n=21) and control (n=38) one, matched for the sex and age.
The patients in the control group received the conventional medical treatment in accordance with the adopted medical and economic standards during 2 weeks.
The patients of the main group received, in addition to the basal medicinal therapy, the proposed combined rehabilitative physiotherapeutic treatment that included a course of therapy with modulated sinusoidal currents, total wrapping with the use of a Rapan saline solution, and sedative inhalations of the of peony root extract.
The effectiveness of these rehabilitation modalities was monitored before and after the course of therapy based on the estimation of bowel function dynamics, the severity of pain syndrome, and the patient's quality of life in terms of the health status with the use of the SF-36 questionnaire.
RESULTS
The therapeutic and rehabilitative procedures resulted in a well apparent improvement of the genera condition in the patients of the main group associated with a greater degree of reduction of the incidence of specific clinical symptoms, more rapid relief of the pain syndrome, and a more pronounced improvement of the quality of life indices in comparison with the same variables in the patients comprising the control group.
After the course of the treatment and rehabilitation, the incidence of spinal pain in the patients of the main group was significantly reduced by 87% (p=0.001) compared with those of the control group (32%; p=0.005).
The frequency of abdominal pain decreased in the main group by 47% (p=0.021) versus the control group (by 27%; p=0.007).  The quality of life indices increased 1.2 times in the main group but remained unaltered in the control group.
DISCUSSION
The patients of the main group exhibited a more pronounced than in the control group positive dynamics of health conditions characterized by a well apparent reduction in the incidence of the major clinical symptoms of the disease, faster alleviation of the pain syndrome, and the marked improvement of the quality of life indices.  CONCLUSIONS
The results of the study with the inclusion of therapy with modulated sinusoidal currents together with total wrapping using the Rapan saline solution and sedative inhalations into the program of the combined treatment of the patients presenting with dorsopathy of the lumbar spine and concomitant irritable bowel syndrome provide a basis for recommending this physiotherapeutic modality for personalized rehabilitation of this group of patients under conditions of a therapeutic clinic.
