[The modern approaches to the restoration of postural balance in the patients suffering from the consequences of an acute cerebrovascular accident (CVA)].  BACKGROUND
the most frequent and severe consequences of an acute cerebrovascular accident (CVA) are locomotor and coordination disorders which significantly increase the risk of falling in a static position and when walking.
The methods used for the rehabilitation of the affected patients are designed in the first place to enable the patients to acquire the skills necessary for maintaining the static balance.  The modern equipment allows to carry out coordination training in the static position and also during walking.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate, based on the results of our original research, the feasibility and effectiveness of the application of the «Balance tutor» system developed for the restoration of static and dynamic balance in the framework of the combined rehabilitation treatment of the patients suffering from impaired postural balance as a consequence of acute cerebrovascular accident (CVA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS
A total of 56 patients presenting with impaired postural balance following CVA were available for the examination.  All of them underwent functional testing to assess the static and dynamic balance, walking abilities, and the risk of falling down including the study with the use of computer-assisted stabilometry.
RESULTS  The study has demonstrated that the inclusion of the «Balance tutor» system for the restoration of the static and dynamic balance in the combined rehabilitative treatment of the patients having postural balance disorders after the CVA reduces the risk of fall for a walking patient, improves his (her) static and dynamic balance, increases the patient's ability to move without exterior help.
The patients comprising the main study group were found to experience a decrease of statokinesiogram space in the «eyes are open» position (p = 0.0576, the Mann-Whitney U test) as well as a reliable decrease of the statokinesiogram space in the «eyes are closed» position (p=0.0063, the Mann-Whitney U test).
Similar changes occurred in speed of pressure center relocation.
By the end of the rehabilitation course, the patients of the main group exhibited a reliable enhancement in the dynamic balance rates estimated with the use of the Berg Balance Scale (p=0.028, Tukey's criterion), an increase in stability based at the Tinneti scale, p=0.0291; Tukey's criterion), and a decrease of the risk of falling during walk assessed with the application of Dynamic Gait Index scale (p = 0.0001, Tukey's criterion).
DISCUSSION
The results of the present study with the inclusion of the «Balance tutor» system in the program of combined rehabilitation of the patients suffering from the consequences of CVA in the form of the postural balance impairment give evidence of the feasibility and effectiveness of this approach.  There is reason to believe that its application is likely to reduce the risk of falling down and to improve characteristics of static and dynamic balance.
CONCLUSION
The inclusion of the «Balance tutor» system in the program of combined rehabilitation of the patients suffering from the consequences of CVA in the form of the postural balance impairment is both feasible and effective.
