[The rationale for the application of photomagnetic therapy in the treatment of dermatitis].
BACKGROUND  in spite of the fact that photomagnetic therapy with the use of the FotoSPOK device (Magnomed Ltd., Belarus) is already used in the medical practice, the application of this method for the management of many diseases remains to be substantiated on the scientifically sound grounds.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of photomagnetic therapy in the treatment of the local inflammatory process in the skin and to elaborate the rationale for the application of this technique in the treatment of contact dermatitis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The experiments were carried out on 168 outbred male rats.
A modified model of experimental contact dermatitis was used in the work.
The course of the treatment consisted of 8 procedures lasting 20 minutes each.
The character and regression of dermatitis were estimated based on the general condition of the animals and dynamics of the skin processes.
Simultaneously, the cutaneous temperature was recorded and skin microcirculation assessed.
The morphological changes in the skin were evaluated in the rats with experimental dermatitis that received no treatment as well as in those given a course of photomagnetic therapy, before and after its application.
RESULTS
The clinical, histochemical and histological data obtained in this study give evidence that the most effective tool currently available for the treatment of experimental dermatitis is photomagnetic therapy with the use a low-frequency magnetic field in the combination with the light of the blue and green spectral regions for the elimination of the inflammatory changes and oedema and with the light of the red and yellow spectral regions for the restoration of microcirculation and stimulation of regenerative processes in the skin.
CONCLUSIONS
The results of the present study can serve as the basis for the differentiated application of the light of different wavelengths in dermatology; also, they can be used for the further development of the methods of photomagnetic therapy for the treatment of the inflammatory processes in the skin.
