[Assessment of life quality and job satisfaction of neurosurgeons in the Russian Federation (a sociological study)].  PURPOSE
The study purpose was to investigate and evaluate factors of career satisfaction among neurosurgeons in the Russian Federation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS  During the pilot study, 217 neurosurgeons in the Russian Federation were surveyed in 2016.
The survey was conducted through an anonymous voluntary questionnaire.
The questionnaire consisted of four sections: 1) demographic data; 2) evaluation of professional stress factors; 3) characteristics of job satisfaction; 4) quality of life indicators.
Responses in ordinal scales were evaluated using one-dimensional frequency analysis; factors related to career satisfaction were assessed using correlation and regression analyses.
RESULTS
More than 80% of the respondents were males under the age of 40, ordinary doctors, without a scientific degree, with less than 15 years of work experience, performing less than 150 operations a year, and receiving wages less than 60 thousand rubles per month.
The most common negative job-related factors of occupational stress included a large amount of work with medical records and insufficient wages.
Only 51% of neurosurgeons were in general satisfied with their career.
The greatest dissatisfaction in more than 55% of respondents was associated with the lack of time for personal development.
More than 83% of respondents considered their legal protection insufficient.
A correlation analysis revealed the greatest correlation (about 0.4) between career satisfaction and opportunities for professional growth as well as between mutual understanding with colleagues and confidence in the future.
In addition, a regression analysis revealed the following factors: time for doing science, confidence in a stable salary, work on weekends, knowledge of English, and insufficient supply of consumables.
CONCLUSION
Career satisfaction of the neurosurgeon depends mainly on working conditions and confidence in career prospects.
