[Intraoperative fluorescence diagnostics in surgery of intracranial meningiomas: analysis of 101 cases].  Fluorescence diagnostics has been extensively applied in surgery of malignant brain gliomas.
However, the use of this technique in surgery of intracranial meningiomas has remained controversial.  OBJECTIVE
The study objective was to assess the sensitivity of 5-aminolevulinic acid-based (5-ALA) fluorescence diagnostics in surgery of brain meningiomas and to clarify the clinical and biological factors that may influence the fluorescent effect.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study consistently included 101 patients with intracranial meningiomas of various locations who were operated on using 5-ALA.
There were 28 (27.72%) males and 73 (72.27%) females (median age, 54 years).  In all patients, surgery was performed using an operating microscope equipped with a fluorescent module; in 24 of these, laser spectroscopy was used.
For comparison of chances to observe the fluorescent effect of 5-ALA in patients having meningiomas with different WHO histological grades (Grade I vs Grade II-III), we performed a meta-analysis that included 10 studies (the largest series) on outcomes of surgical treatment of meningiomas using intraoperative fluorescence diagnostics.
RESULTS
Of 101 patients included in this series, observable fluorescence was detected in 95 (94.1%) patients: weak fluorescence in 12 (11.9%), moderate fluorescence in 23 (22.8%) cases, and strong fluorescence in 60 (59.4%) patients.
There was no statistically significant relationship (p>0.05) between the rate and intensity of observable fluorescence and the tumor growth pattern (primary/continued), location, WHO grade of malignancy, and histological subtype.
In the absence of intraoperative bleeding, tumor fluorescence was statistically significantly brighter (p=0.02).
Of 26 patients with hyperostosis, bone fluorescence was observed in 11 (42.3%) cases.
There was no statistically significant relationship between administration of dexamethasone, its dose, administration of anticonvulsants, gastrointestinal tract diseases, as well as diabetes mellitus and the fluorescence intensity.
There was also no significant relationship between the extent of tumor resection (Simpson scale) and the presence of fluorescence as well as its intensity.
Comparison of the observable fluorescence intensity and the laser spectroscopy indicators revealed a significant correlation (r=0.75; p=0.005).
CONCLUSION
Meningioma is a well fluorescent tumor, with the technique sensitivity being 94.1%.
In some cases, the use of fluorescence diagnostics in surgery of meningiomas improves identification of residual tumor fragments and enables correction of a surgical approach.
To assess the effect of fluorescence diagnostics on the recurrence rate and disease-free duration, further research is required.
