[The analysis of the judicial practice of treating the civil lawsuits concerning the inadequate dental health service appeals launched by the patients in the Russian Federation during the period from 1993 to 2017].  The objective of the present study was to elucidate the characteristic features and peculiarities in the dynamic of the civil legal proceedings concerning the quality of the stomatological aid to the population of the Russian Federation during the period from 1993 to 2017.
We have undertaken the analysis of the official sources containing the court reports on the statements of claim launched by the patients.
The study gave evidence of the currently well apparent sustained tendency toward the increase in the number of such civil lawsuits.  The probabilities of legal proceedings in connection with the unfavourable outcomes of the dental treatment are roughly identical in all areas of the stomatological practice.
The maximum number of the respective civil lawsuits arise from the claims of the patients against the dental surgeons employed by the healthcare settings designated as the limited liability companies.
The majority of the statements of case coming from the patients contain the demanding financial claims for the compensation of the moral damage.
It is concluded that the aforementioned tendencies in the strategy of the development of the stomatological aid for the population of the Russian Federation dictate the necessity of the priority development of the quality standards (including the clinical guidelines, protocols, etc.) designed to improve the medical assistance for the patients presenting with dental problems, the modernization of the validated methods for the evaluation of the effectiveness of the stomatological aid for the population, the implementation of the measures needed to introduce the mechanisms of professional liability insurance into the routine stomatological practice.
These measures are believed to allow to meet the demand of the population of this country for the high-quality stomatological services.
