[Surgery of posterior cranial fossa tumors in children in the prone position.  The surgical technique features].
Posterior cranial fossa tumors are the most common neuro-oncological pathology of childhood.
More than half of them are located along the midline, occupying the cerebellar vermis and 4th ventricle cavity.  Historically, most of these tumors were operated on with the patient in sitting position.
This tendency has significantly changed in the last 30 years.
For example, 95% of all operations in Japan are now performed with the patient in lying position; for the US and Europe, these figures are 80 and 60%, respectively.
This global tendency of switching to the lying position is mainly associated with a high risk of venous air embolism in the sitting position.
In the period between 1999 and 2013, the first author used only the sitting position for resection of PCF tumors.
During this period, he performed 606 operations.
In patients with large/giant tumors (usually, these were piloid astrocytomas with cysts), the surgeon often faced the problem of excessive retraction of the cerebellum and rupture of the bridging veins, sometimes outside the surgical approach area.
This situation led either to massive blood loss or to venous air embolism.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
Therefore, beginning at 2013, we started to selectively use the prone position in cases of hemispheric piloid astrocytomas of the cerebellum.
This initial experience allowed us to assess the surgical features of the procedure and use the experience in more complex interventions.
Since the middle of 2016, given the tendency of using key-hole approaches, we have increasingly used the prone position in surgery of PCF tumors, sometimes removing tumors even through the burr hole.
Since the end of 2016, we have routinely used the prone position for various tumors of the 4th ventricle.
Between November 2016 and September 2017, the first author performed 113 surgeries for PCF tumors in children; of these, only 4 operations were performed in the sitting position.
Thus, in less than a year, the prone position has become the main one in surgery for all PCF tumors in our practice.
In this article, we would like to share our practical suggestions both about using the prone position and about its advantages and disadvantages that should be considered by a doctor who does not have experience of PCF surgery with the patient in prone position.
