[Predicting the probability of development and progression of primary open angle glaucoma by regression modeling].  Prediction of the clinical course of primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is one of the main directions in solving the problem of vision loss prevention and stabilization of the pathological process.
Simple statistical methods of correlation analysis show the extent of each risk factor's impact, but do not indicate the total impact of these factors in personalized combinations.
The relationships between the risk factors is subject to correlation and regression analysis.
The regression equation represents the dependence of the mathematical expectation of the resulting sign on the combination of factor signs.  PURPOSE
To develop a technique for predicting the probability of development and progression of primary open-angle glaucoma based on a personalized combination of risk factors by linear multivariate regression analysis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 66 patients (23 female and 43 male; 132 eyes) with newly diagnosed primary open-angle glaucoma.  The control group consisted of 14 patients (8 male and 6 female).
Standard ophthalmic examination was supplemented with biochemical study of lacrimal fluid.
Concentration of matrix metalloproteinase MMP-2 and MMP-9 in tear fluid in both eyes was determined using 'sandwich' enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method.
RESULTS  The study resulted in the development of regression equations and step-by-step multivariate logistic models that can help calculate the risk of development and progression of POAG.
Those models are based on expert evaluation of clinical and instrumental indicators of hydrodynamic disturbances (coefficient of outflow ease - C, volume of intraocular fluid secretion - F, fluctuation of intraocular pressure), as well as personalized morphometric parameters of the retina (central retinal thickness in the macular area) and concentration of MMP-2 and MMP-9 in the tear film.
CONCLUSION
The newly developed regression equations are highly informative and can be a reliable tool for studying of the influence vector and assessment of pathogenic potential of the independent risk factors in specific personalized combinations.
