[The rhinological simulator: the upgrade and validation study with the evaluation of the effectiveness of its application].  The objective of the present study was to upgrade the rhinological simulator employed as a tool for the teaching of the basic technical skills in endoscopic sinus surgery (ESS).
The new ESS simulator providing a model of the nasal cavity consists of the replaceable cylinders and the adaptable table stand.  It includes a set of 3D printed nasal models.
Each of them is the elliptical tube of a specific size.  The participants of the study performed different tasks depending on the structural properties of the tubes.
A wide variety of surgical instruments and esndoscopes could be fitted to the simulator.  16 otorhinolaryngologists having no previous experience with ESS were recruited into the study to evaluate the effectiveness of the training procedures.
After a brief tutorial, the participants practiced an one hour-long exercise per day during 5 days.
The pre-training and post-training performances were videotaped.  The task-performance time and the number of technical errors made by the operators were estimated immediately before and after the training session.
To assess the subjective attitudes of the operators toward the new technology, the participants of the study were asked to complete the model questionnaire soon after the termination of the training course.  The questionnaire contained 34 items.
The correctness of the answers was assessed based on the 5-point Likert scale, with score 1 meaning 'totally disagree' and score 5 - 'totally agree'.  The statistically significant reduction of the performance time and the number of technical mistakes was documented within the first 5 hours after the onset of teaching (p<0.05) which suggests the effectiveness of the training procedures.
The questionnaire study has demonstrated the positive attitude of the trainees toward the proposed technology.  The average score based on the Likert scale was higher than 3 for all kinds of questions.
It is concluded that the results of this study give evidence of the positive assessment of the upgraded rhinological simulator as an effective tool for the teaching of the basic skills necessary to operate various surgical instruments and endoscopes by the novice surgeons in the field of endoscopic sinus surgery .
