[Complex morphological assessment of anterior capsule of the lens in patients with capsular contraction syndrome (a clinical case study)].  The anterior capsular contraction syndrome (ACCS) in pseudophakic patients is known to be accompanied by postoperative opacity of anterior lens capsule (ALC) and partial or full closure of anterior capsulotomy opening.
PURPOSE  To perform complex morphological assessment of ALC in patients with ACCS.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study involved complex analysis of ALC that was removed due to ACCS in the pseudophakic eye in the setting of diabetes mellitus and past vitreoretinal surgery.
The following examination methods were used: light-optical microscopy of ALC samples in the form of polychrome-colored semifine sections using optical microscope Leica DM-2500 (Germany), scanning microscopy of ALC surface with EVO LS10 (Carl Zeiss, Germany) microscope, analysis of chemical element composition and its variation of the ALC sample with energy-dispersive spectrometer Oxford X-Max50 (Oxford, UK).
RESULTS
Light-optical microscopy showed altered state and plication of ALC induced by proliferation from inner surface of the fibrocellular tissue, which gradually thickens (up to 360 µm) towards center and causes reduction of anterior capsulotomy opening.
Scanning electron microscopy revealed presence of tissue with uneven micro-relief and a porous three-dimensional structure uncharacteristic for capsule on the surface of ALC.
Thickness of the fibrous deposition significantly exceeded the thickness of ALC.
Evaluation of elemental composition of the fibrocellular tissue showed elevated concentration of sulfur and phosphorus, which indicates high activity of the regenerative process.
In the observed case, the regenerative process was of substitute nature because an attempt to restore the lens was accompanied by formation of connective tissue structurally different from original.
CONCLUSION
Complex assessment of an isolated ALC sample allowed revelation of the chain of pathological processes accompanying the development of ACCS.
