[The restoration of the shoulder joint function in the patients presenting with hemiparesis during the acute phase of hemispheric stroke].  The impaired function of the shoulder joint resulting from cerebral stroke is a common disorder involving permanent total disability as well as impaired capability of self-care.
The functional pathological changes in the shoulder joint and the dynamics of the patients' health status during the acute period of cerebral stroke remain virtually unexplored.  AIM
The objective of the present study was to obtain a deeper insight into the process of recovery of the movements in the shoulder joint of the patients presenting with hemiparesis during the acute period of hemispheric stroke based on the results of the analysis of the biomechanical data and the targeted training with biofeedback (BFB).  MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included three groups comprised of 25 subjects each.  One (control) group included the subjects having neither neurological nor orthopedic pathology.
The second group consisted of the patients receiving the conventional treatment in the combination with therapeutic physical exercises (TPE).  Group 3 was composed of the patients given the standard course of conventional and physical (TPE) therapy complemented by biofeedback training (the TPE/BFB group).
The study included clinical investigations and biomechanical registration of the movements of the shoulder joints and trunk.
RESULTS
The results of the study gave evidence that the patients presenting with hemiparesis during the acute period of hemispheric ischemic stroke including those treated with the application of the active means and methods of rehabilitation, such as BFB training, showed no appreciable dynamics of the parameters being evaluated with the use of the relevant clinical scales.
The biomechanical study has demonstrated that the movements in the shoulder joints (in a single plain) of the patients comprising the control group are characterized by the presence of the main component with a maximum amplitude in the plane of this movement and additional components (in other planes with a significantly lower amplitude); they are accompanied by the ancillary movements of the trunk.
Functionally, the condition of paresis at the level of the shoulder joint is characterized by a decrease in the amplitude of the primary movement and the increase of one of the additional amplitudes, with the growing amplitude of the auxiliary movements of the trunk.
The biomechanical methods for the objective assessment have revealed the following functional changes in the shoulder joints: the 6% improvement of flexion in the group of the patients treated with the use of therapeutic physical exercises and the 10% improvement in those treated with the combination of TPE and BFB.  Moreover, abduction in the patients of these two groups improved by 4% and 9% respectively.
CONCLUSIONS
The method for the study of kinematics of the movements in the shoulder joints appears to be most sensitive and informative for the purpose of diagnostics of disorders of the motor function and assessment of the process of its restoration in the patients presenting with hemiparesis during the acute period of hemispheric stroke.
