[Dynamics of sleep disorders and health characteristics, relationship to prevention of cardiovascular diseases among women 25-44 years old in Russia/Siberian].  AIM
To determine the 23-year dynamics (1994-2017) of the relationship between sleep disorders (SD) and attitudes toward their health, behavioral characteristics and prevention of cardiovascular diseases in the open population among women 25-44 years old in Russia/Siberia (Novosibirsk).
MATERIAL AND METHODS
In the third screening of the WHO program 'Study of trends and control of cardiovascular diseases' MONICA, 'the subprogram' MONICA-psychosocial (MOPSY), a random representative sample of women, aged 25-64 years, of one of the areas of Novosibirsk (n=870) was examined in 1994.
In 2016, in the framework of screening studies, a random representative sample of women, aged 25-44 years, was examined in the same district of Novosibirsk (n=668).
Sleep assessment was performed using the Jenkins Sleep Questionnaire.
Attitude to their health, behavioral characteristics and prevention of cardiovascular diseases were studied using the 'Knowledge and attitude to one's health' scale proposed by the WHO 'MONICA' program and validated in the Russian population.
RESULTS
The prevalence of SD among women 25-44 years old decreased from 59.6% to 47.3% from 1994 to 2017.
The proportion of women with SD, who consider themselves not completely healthy or sick, decreased from 86.2% to 67.6%.
The majority of women with SD (57%) consider the high probability of getting a serious illness in the next 5-10 years, but only 7% of women with SD have regular screening tests.
The share of those, who were satisfied with medical care, increased by 2017 but does not exceed 13%.
In case of malaise, only 1 in 10 women apply to a doctor, as in 1994.
The intensity of work of young women with SD is higher compared to those with good sleep; they more often (more than 40%) do additional work, are more responsible.
An increase in the level of family stress among women with SD is characterized by more frequent illness/death of a loved one, rare opportunity to relax in home environment.
Recently, the number of women smokers has increased, their physical activity has decreased, and their adherence to dietary recommendations has been low.
CONCLUSION
Over the studied period, there were: the decrease in SD; in case of SD, a more careful attitude towards one's health in the sick; the increase in the intensity of work, responsibility at work, stress in the family.
Adverse, statistically significant trends towards increasing in the intensity of smoking, reducing physical activity, low adherence to compliance with dietary recommendations in women with SD have been obtained.
