[Influence of biliary decompression technique on the outcomes of reconstructive surgery].  AIM
To evaluate bile ducts injuries and effect of biliary decompression technique on the outcomes of reconstructive surgery.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
There were 21 patients with biliary injury during cholecystectomy, 20 patients with cholelithiasis, and 1 patient after surgery for perforated duodenal ulcer.
Their age was 22-81 years (mean 54.3 years).
Primary surgery through median laparotomy was followed by biliary injury in 12 patients, laparoscopic cholecystectomy - in 6 patients, open laparoscopy - in 3 patients.
Patients were divided into 2 groups.
In group 1 (n=11) biliary injury was diagnosed intraoperatively, in group 2 (n=10) - in 2-11 days after primary procedure.
According to European Association for Endoscopic Surgery (EAES) 2013 classification biliary injury type 1 was found in 5 patients, type 2 - in 9 cases, high damage involving confluence (type 3) - in 1 patient, type 4 - in 1 patient, and type 6 - in 5 patients.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography in 3 patients revealed that biliary drainage output after laparoscopic cholecystectomy was caused by cystic duct clipping failure, endoscopic papillosphincterotomy was successfully used for biliary drainage output (type 6).
In 3 patients operated through median laparotomy biliary excretion cessation was observed after 2-3 days that indicated damage of aberrant bile ducts.
RESULTS
Bile outflow into gastrointestinal tract was restored in 11 out of 16 patients with iatrogenic biliary injury types 1-4, external biliary drainage was used in 4 patients due to their severe condition and abdominal inflammatory changes.
Biliary fistulae occurred in 5 out of 8 patients in both groups after primary reconstructive surgery.  Biliary stricture was observed in 3 cases due to external biliary drainage failure followed by peritonitis.
7 patients underwent reconstructive surgery with positive result.
Mortality was absent.
In 1 patient with biliary fistula outcome is unknown.
CONCLUSION
Transumbilical biliary drainage is optimal during reconstructive surgery.
