[The significance of antistreptolysin O characteristics for the determination of indications for tonsillectomy in the children].  The objective of the present work was to evaluate the diagnostic significance of the measurement of the antistreptolysin O (ASLO) titers in the children presenting with chronic tonsillitis for determining the indications for tonsillectomy.
The study included 54 patients at the age varying from 4 to 17 years who had undergone bilateral tonsillectomy for the treatment of chronic tonsillitis.
The diagnosis was confirmed by the results of the histological study of the removed amygdalae.
Prior to surgery, all the patients had been subjected to the bacteriological investigation of the smears taken from the surface of the palatal tonsils.
The titers of antistreptolysin O in the serum were determined with the use of the kinetic nephelometric technique before, 6 and 12 months after the surgical intervention.
The results of the measurements were treated using the Statzilla software package (version 3.2, R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria).
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A) was identified only in 7 (13%) patients.  The initially enhanced content of ASLO ranging from 273 to 1880 IU/ml was documented in 42 (77.7%) of the 54 patients.  Twelve patients had the ASLO titers within the normal limits (from 13 to 124 IU/ml).
The removal of palatal tonsils resulted in a significant decrease of the ASLO titers in the patients who had presented with the initially enhanced content of antistreptolysin O (p < 0.05); nevertheless, their ASLO titers remained higher than the normal values in 69% and 82% of the patients examined within 6 and 12 months after the surgical intervention, respectively.
The patients who had exhibited the high levels of antistreptolysin O during the preoperative period did not experience normalization of this parameter after surgery.
It is concluded, taking into account the absence of correlation between the enhancement of serum antistreptolysin O titers and the presence of group A beta-chemolytic Streptococci (BCSA), that the result of the measurement of ASLO titers can not be considered as a valid indication for tonsillectomy in the children.
