[Standardization of intensive therapy tactics for acute hepatic insufficiency in patients with liver cirrhosis after portosystem shunting].  AIM
Here we analyze efficiency of the algorithm for intensive therapy of acute hepatic insufficiency in patients with cirrhosis after portosystemic shunting, based on the experience of the Republican Specialized Scientific and Practical Medical Center of Surgery named after academician V.V. Vakhidov and considering recommendations of the world's leading hepatology schools.  MATERIAL AND METHODS
Algorithm efficiency was analyzed based on the results of portosystemic shunting of 556 patients with cirrhosis and acute liver insufficiency.  Treatment effectiveness was assessed by presence and severity of postoperative complications, such as hepatic insufficiency and hepatic encephalopathy.
Initial decompensation of liver cirrhosis significantly increases the risk of postoperative complications of portosystemic shunting due to edematous ascites syndrome - liver insufficiency (13.5% vs 6.9% in patients without ascites p≥0.05) and hepatic encephalopathy (64.9% vs. 51,7%, respectively, p≥0.05).
In group of patients with preoperative ascites syndrome mortality rate was 3.8% (10 patients) and in the group without ascites - 2.3% (6 patients).
The main cause of early postoperative lethality was anastomotic thrombosis development with recurrence of bleeding from esophagus and stomach varicose veins.
To reduce the risk of postoperative complications and lethality, a therapeutic-tactical algorithm was developed which was effective in combination with a complex of conservative and biophysical methods of treatment and aimed at eliminating the 'resolving factors' of their developmen.
RESULTS  One of the most important components of this algorithm is pharmacotherapy with hepatoprotective drugs use in patients with liver cirrhosis in the postoperative period to maintain liver functional state.
Considering the antihypoxic, detoxifying and antioxidant properties of active components of remaxol and revealed positive effect of its use in patients (decrease in bilirubin level, increase in albumin fraction of total blood protein and decrease in activity of ALAT and ASAT in 2 times), this drug can be recommended for inclusion in the postoperative pathogenetic standard therapy in this category of patients.
