[Li-Fraumeni syndrome in a patient with multiple anaplastic oligodendrogliomas of the brain (a case report and literature review)].  Li-Fraumeni syndrome (LFS) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous hereditary syndrome with predominantly oncological manifestations, which is associated with mutations in the TP53, MDM2, and CHEK2 genes.
The most common variant is a TP53 mutation.  OBJECTIVE
To analyze the literature and present a clinical case of a patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and multiple anaplastic oligodendrogliomas of the brain.
CLINICAL CASE
A 42-year-old male patient presented with complaints of headaches, word finding difficulty, memory loss, right hemianopsia, and generalized convulsive attacks.
For 10 years, he underwent multiple interventions and chemotherapy courses for colon adenocarcinoma and recurrent B-cell lymphoma.
MRI revealed multiple space-occupying lesions of the cerebraln hemispheres, which were located in the left temporo-occipital and right frontal regions.
RESULTS
The patient underwent resection of multiple space-occupying lesions of the left temporo-occipital and right frontal regions.  The postoperative period proceeded without complications.
The histological diagnosis was WHO grade III anaplastic oligodendroglioma.  The patient and one of his sons were detected with a R248W missense mutation in the TP53 gene.
The patient underwent six courses of temozolomide chemotherapy.  At a follow-up examination 20 months after surgery and chemotherapy, the patient's condition was satisfactory; he returned to work.
Control MRI of the brain revealed no signs of continued tumor growth.
CONCLUSION  An analysis of the literature and the clinical case indicate the success of multiple surgical interventions and chemotherapy courses performed for a long time in the patient with Li-Fraumeni syndrome manifested by colon adenocarcinoma, recurrent B-cell lymphoma, and multiple anaplastic oligodendroglioma of the brain.
The patient had a good quality of life and returned to professional activity.
