All patients underwent surgery with subsequent histological verification.  CT-perfusion was performed in 10 CH patients and 2 CapH patients according to a developed low-dose protocol (80 kV, 200 mAs, tscan=40 s) with allowance for a target localizer (80 kV, 120 mAs) and at a maximum radiation dose of not more than 4.0 mZv.
Neoplasm microcirculation was quantitatively assessed by calculating hemodynamic parameters: blood flow velocity (BFV), blood volume (BV), and mean transit time (MTT).  MRI without and with contrast enhancement was performed in 11 CH patients and 2 CapH patients according to the ophthalmologic protocol (Signa GE, 3.0 T) accepted at the Institute: without contrast enhancement - T1, T2, and T2-FLAIR modes, T1 and T2 with a Fat Sat technique at a scan thickness of 3 mm, and DWI MRI; contrast enhancement - T1 (three projections) mode, including the Fat Sat technique.
SWAN (n=2) and non-contrast MR perfusion ASL (n=3) were also used.  Diffusion-weighted images (DWI) were processed with calculation of the apparent diffusion coefficient (ACD).
In CapH cases, significantly increased blood flow velocity and volume values and a low MTT value in the tumor were observed: BVCapH=10.30±4.10 mL/100 g, BFVCapH=119.72±53.13 mL/100 g/min, and MTTCapH=4.35±1.79 s.  In the case of orbital hemangiomas, optimal MRI modes were T1 and T2 with the Fat Sat technique, a scan thickness of 3 mm, and intravenous contrast enhancement.
The revealed pattern of contrast agent accumulation by CH, initially in the central part and then in the periphery, may be a useful radiographic sign in the differential diagnosis with other orbital tumors.  CONCLUSION
Modern CT- and MRI-based diagnostics of orbital hemangiomas provides not only the exact location, size, and spread of the lesion but also reveals the characteristic structural features of these tumors, and the use of perfusion techniques visualizes hemodynamics of the tumors.  CT-perfusion-based hemodynamic parameters of cavernous hemangiomas typical of this type of hemangiomas may be used in the differential diagnosis with other tumors of this location.
The use of contrast enhancement and the Fat Sat technique with a scan thickness of not more than 3 mm is optimal for MRI diagnostics of orbital hemangiomas.
