[Implantation of VPS in the early postoperative period following removal of posterior cranial fossa tumors in children].  One of the main manifestations of posterior cranial fossa (PCF) tumors is the development of hydrocephalus (HC) symptoms that in most cases are the reason for examination and diagnosis [1, 2].
According to the literature, the rate of shunt surgery after removal of PCF tumors in the children's population is 18-40% [3-9].
Hydrocephalus remaining after removal of PCF tumor and requiring further treatment is called persistent hydrocephalus.
The above figures are based on the treatment outcomes in children, which were obtained as early as in the 1990s.
Given these facts, we conducted a modern study to assess the risk of persistence/development of persistent hydrocephalus in children after removal of posterior cranial fossa tumors and to explore factors affecting this risk.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
We performed a retrospective analysis of the treatment outcomes in 155 children operated on at the Burdenko Neurosurgical Institute between 2012 and 2014.
All children were operated on by a single surgeon.
Factors, such as the patient age, histological pattern of tumor, and primary/repeated surgery, were analyzed.
RESULTS
A total of 13 (8.4%) patients needed shunt surgery.
An analysis demonstrated no need for shunt surgery in children with piloid astrocytomas.
In children with medulloblastoma, the need for a permanent shunt occurred in 5 (9.1%) cases; all these children were older than 3 years.
A group of anaplastic ependymoma included 23 children; of these, 13 children were older than 3 years, and 10 children were under the age of 3 years.  Five (21.7%) patients required shunt surgery.
Shunting was needed in 3 children from group 4.  In one case, a child younger than 3 years of age who was operated on for a dermoid cyst of the PCF, and in 2 children older than 3 years of age who were operated on for ganglioastroscytoma and atypical teratoid-rhabdoid tumor (ATRT).
CONCLUSION
At present, the risk of persistent hydrocephalus in children after removal of PCF tumors is lower than that reported in the literature.
In our study, it was 8.4%.
The age of children under 3 years and repeated operations do not statistically significantly increase the risk of persistent hydrocephalus.
Only tumor histology is statistically significant: the highest risk of the need for implantation of VPS was found in the group with anaplastic ependymomas, and the minimal risk was in the group of piloid astrocytomas.
