[The prognostic factors of the effectiveness of the stability training in the patients presenting with musculoskeletal system diseases].  BACKGROUND
One of the main syndromes characteristic of the patients suffering from the diseases of the musculoskeletal system is postural instability.  Stability training is a functional method for the restoration of postural balance in the patients presenting with the diseases of the musculoskeletal system.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to determine the predictors of the effectiveness of stability training based on biological feedback in the patients with the diseases of the musculoskeletal system.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included a total of 128 patients (104 patients in the main group and 24 ones in the control group) with the following nosological forms: spinal spondylarthrosis, coxarthrosis, gonarthrosis.
All the patients underwent a course of the standard rehabilitation treatment the basis of which was constituted by physical therapy.
The patients of the main group additionally received stability training based on biological feedback for 10 to 20 minutes daily.
RESULT
The prognostic factors of the effectiveness of biological feedback-based stability training in the patients with musculoskeletal system diseases were identified including the age, reactive and personal anxiety indicators using the Spielberger-Hanin anxiety scale, depression indicators based on the Beck depression scale, the indicators of functional independence and daily activity based on the Morse-Fall-Scale scale, visualization data, the results of duplex scanning of brachiocephalic arteries.
These factors, in varying degrees, had an impact on the stabilometric parameters used for the purpose of stability training.
CONCLUSION
The results of the study give evidence of the beneficial influence of the stability training based on biological feedback on the recovery of the postural functions in the patients presenting with the diseases of the musculoskeletal system.
