[Carbon dioxide waters of the Daurian hydromineral region(the Eastern Transbaikal territory)].  BACKGROUND
More than 280 outcrops of carbon dioxide waters are known to exist in the Daurian hydromineral region, with the majority of the published data about them dating back to the 1960s of the last century and containing information only on their overall chemical composition.  During the recent years, we have undertaken the investigations into the physical and chemical characteristics of about 40 outcrops of these waters that allowed to identify a large number of microelements contained in their composition including those that are normalized for drinking use.
The principal objectives of the present study were to obtain information about the chemical composition of carbon dioxide waters at the territory under consideration, to elucidate their main balneologically significant components, and to verify their status as mineral waters meeting the criteria according GOST R 54316-2011.  METHODS
The components of the chemical composition of the waters in question were determined in a certified laboratory by the titrimetric (CO2, HCO32-), turbidimetric (SO42-), potentiometric (Cl-, F-), atomic absorption (Ca, Mg, Na, K, Fe) and spectrophotometric (Si) methods.  The analysis of the water samples for microelements was carried out by mass spectrometry with inductively coupled plasma (ICP MS).
The novel information about the chemical composition of carbonic waters of the Daurskaya hydromineral region in the Eastern Transbaikal territory, the possibilities for their therapeutic applications and commercial bottling has been obtained in the course of the present study.  In addition to the Darasunsky and Kukinsky balneological types of bicarbonate alkaline-earth waters envisaged by GOST R 54316-2011, carbonic waters of other types were discovered and characterized including those that have no analogs in this standard.
At present, the spa and health resort facilities are functioning based at six ooutcrops and another three are currently under construction by local hydropathic institutions.  Industrial bottling of medicinal table water is organized at six outcrops.
The resource potential of the Daurian hydromineral region in terms of carbonic waters creates the prerequisites for the significant expansion of their medical and commercial applications.  The authors emphasize the necessity of determining the physical properties and the chemical microelement composition of both the newly developed and the yet undeveloped outcrops of carbon dioxide waters bearing in mind that some of them may contain a number of toxic elements the levels of which exceed the permissible standard levels.
