[Determining the prescription of brain injuries based on the changes of the nucleolus organizer in astrocytes].  The well apparent signs of the proliferative reaction and activity of the nucleolus organizer in astrocytes within the zone of injury and at its periphery are considered to be the indicators of the participation of these cells in all the phases of the inflammatory and reparative processes associated with the brain injury.
The objective of the present study was the evaluation of the changes in the number of the nucleoli in the nuclei of astrocytes during the acute post-traumatic period following the craniocerebral injury.
A total of 26 cases of death of the men and women at the age from 36 to 50 years caused by the craniocerebral trauma were available for the examination.
The tissue samples were stained with hematoxylin and eosin, based on the use of the Perls' Prussian blue staining protocol or by means of the AgNOR staining technique.
The astrocytes in the regions immediately adjacent to the sites of brain injury were shown to undergo areactive necrosis during the first hours after the damage had been inflicted.
The evaluation of the changes in the astrocytes required taking into consideration the influence of autolysis on the character of the signs being identified.
The increase of the number of points in the astrocytes in which RNA replication occurs within days 2-4 after the injury can be accounted for by the accumulation of the granules containing silver in the cell nuclei.
The cross reactions between hemosiderin and RNA await further investigations.
It is concluded that the methods employed in this study may be of diagnostic significance for the purposes of forensic medical histology if used in the combination with other specialized techniques for determining the prescription of the craniocerebral injuries.
The combination of the morphological and functional studies opens up the promising prospects for the investigations into the necrotic and proliferative processes in astrocytes associated with brain injuries of different origin.
