[The using the modern technologies simulators for the strengthening of the back muscles in the schoolchildren suffering from first degree scoliosis].  BACKGROUND
Strengthening the health of the young people and adolescents is a priority task for the health care system.  The posture, as a habitual position of the body of a person standing at ease, is formed in the course of the child's physical development including the development of the static-dynamic functions.
The problems of rehabilitation of the school-age children arising from the necessity to correct impaired posture, including scoliosis, are associated with their life activity and the socio-economic status.
The majority of the school-age children spending a lot of time watching TV and playing computer games instead of going in for sports, keep a sedentary lifestyle, do not eat rationally, and experience a deficit of vitamins.
These factors contribute to the formation of a weak muscular corset and, as a consequence, lead to the development of an impaired posture.
In terms of physical nature, vibration is a mechanical oscillatory motion that repeats itself at certain intervals.
The vibrational process of a vibrational impact may exert an appreciable biological effect on the human body; therefore, vibration is extensively used to correct the initial manifestations of the disturbances in the development of posture and strengthen the back muscles.  AIM
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the influence of the vibrational effect produced by the simulator on the state of the back muscles in the 12-13 years old children presenting with the early signs of scoliosis.
METHODS
A total of 40 girls at the age of 12-13 years suffering from 1st degree left-sided thoracic spine scoliosis and referred for the rehabilitative treatment were enrolled in the study.
The diagnosis of scoliosis was established during a medical examination.
The angle of curvature determined as described by V.D. Chaklin was 5-10°.
The control group was comprised of 20 schoolgirls engaged in a special rehabilitation program within the framework of the therapeutic physical training (TPT) for 45 minutes three times a week.
The main study group consisted of the schoolgirls who performed exercises on the simulator in addition to the special TPT rehabilitation program.
When on the vibrating platform in the starting position on all fours, the girls performed the following exercises: (a) exercises with the extension and flexion of the back ('kitty'); (b) the 'boat' exercise made on a special cushion with the retraction of the abdomen, and (c) exercises on a balance with the lifting of the left arm and right leg (or vice versa).
The duration of the course was 36 rehabilitation classes.
Each lesson lasted 30 minutes.
RESULTS
The above rehabilitative treatment made it possible to achieve a significant strengthening of the back muscles with increasing their endurance, the improved mobility of the joints of the upper extremities and of the spine joints in the girls of the main group in comparison with those comprising the control group.
CONCLUSION
The additional and special corrective exercises with the use of the vibration platform performed by the girls with first degree scoliosis greatly contributed to the enhancement of the muscle strength, increased mobility of the spine and the joints of the upper extremities.
This allows to conclude that the use of the vibration effect produced by physical exercises on the power plate simulator may provide an efficient tool for the correction of the initial signs of scoliosis and the strengthening of the spine muscles.
