[Contact lens-related keratitis and purulent corneal ulcers].  There have been no studies conducted in Russia on frequency, causes and consequences of contact lens-related infectious complications.
PURPOSE  To analyze cases of severe infectious keratitis and corneal ulcers associated with contact lenses (CL), to develop the optimum treatment strategy for these patients, and to identify areas for improvement in prevention, diagnosis and treatment methods.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 97 patients (103 eyes) with infectious keratitis and corneal ulcers associated with usage of contact lenses (CL) who were followed up from 2009 to 2016.
Medical history of the patients was thoroughly analyzed.
Scraping was taken from the cornea and conjunctiva of 61 patients for seeding.
A three-step treatment strategy using 2-4 types of antimicrobial agents was developed.
RESULTS
In 77 cases (79.3%) the occurrence of infection was associated with violation of the recommended rules of CL wearing and maintenance.
Extended-wear CL had higher complication rate (62 patients) compared with daily-wear CL (17 patients) and orthokeratology (8 patients).
Rigid CL was used in 1 case.
In 9 patients CL type was unknown.
Visual acuity upon admission varied from 1.0 to irregular perception of light projections; in 71 cases visual acuity was 0.3 or lower.
According to microbiological examination, growth of microflora was observed in 20 cases (informational content 32.8%): Pseudomonas aeruginosa (9 eyes); Staphylococcus epidermidis, Acinetobacter species and mold fungi (3 eyes); Cryptococcus laurentii, Serratia marcescens, Burkholderia cepacia, Staphylococcus hominis, Candida (1 eye).
In 10% of patients, non-bacterial infections (fungi and Acanthamoeba) were found.
The average hospital stay duration was 15.2±8.9 days.
Surgical treatment was required in 15 patients (15.5%) including 5 cases of penetrating keratoplasty.
Visual acuity outcome was 0.3-1.0 in 67 cases; 3 patients had light perception with correct projection, and 2 - light perception with irregular projection.
CONCLUSION
An effective treatment strategy for patients with CL-related keratitis and purulent corneal ulcers was developed.
It is necessary to improve microbiological research methods.
Creating a unified national database of such CL-related complications is advisable.
