[Clinical characteristic of factors and tools influencing the effectiveness and safety of local anesthesia in dentistry].  Dental health is one of the most important signs of life quality and depends on the level of health care organization.
Recently the clinical odontology is intensively developing, including local anesthesia where constant searching of effective remedies and methods of suppression and treatment of pain is carried out.
At the same time carrying out adequate local anesthesia has important practical value that is to some extent bound to massive visits of the patients to the clinics.
One of the important factors in the solution of problems of effectiveness and safety of local anesthesia is knowledge of anatomy-topographical features of the structure of maxillofacial area as the irregular technique of local anesthesia which is carried out without features of the anatomical structure of jaws is the main reason for ineffective anesthesia.  From the practical side, the special attention is paid to the patients having various accompanying diseases with negative treatment emotions that lead to the stress development, disorganization of work of functional systems of the organism, change of the mental state.
However the basis of diagnostic process at dentist's consultation depends on the clinical thinking of the doctor which is bound to knowledge of medical psychology and psychoprophylaxis that needs to be applied in the daily practice.  In particular clinical situations premedication methods are successfully used for carrying out adequate anesthesia for dental interventions.
A wide range of ways and methods of the lower alveolar nerve blockade are used in dentistry, where the composite external and internal anatomy-topographical markers which are difficult to remember for the doctor are applied.
It causes the need of carrying out further researches on the maximal simplification of technological and methodological features of mandibular anesthesia and its introduction into dental practice.
