[Radicalness and complications of repeated surgery for malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the posterior cranial fossa in children].  Treatment of primary malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the posterior cranial fossa (PCF) in childhood includes surgical resection, radiation therapy (RT), and chemotherapy (CT).
The radicalness of surgery is one of the most important prognostic factors of survival.  Despite the significant advances in treatment, many of these tumors recur.
Today, oncologists are increasingly recommending repeated surgery for recurrent malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the PCF to achieve gross total resection (GTR).
Patients undergo this surgery after RT and palliative CT, which may increase surgical risks.
OBJECTIVE  The study objective was to assess the resection extent of recurrent malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the PCF in children as well as the risk and structure of postoperative complications.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The prospective study included 50 patients under the age of 18 who underwent surgery for recurrent malignant neuroepithelial tumors of the PCF at the Neurosurgical Institute (NSI) in the period between 2002 and June 2015.
Anaplastic ependymomas were present in 37 patients, and medulloblastomas were detected in 13 patients.
A total of 58 repeated surgeries were performed.
RESULTS
GTR was achieved in 53 (91.4%) cases, near total resection (NTR) was achieved in 2 (3.4%) cases, and subtotal resection (STR) was achieved in 3 (5.2%) cases.
The mean bed-day after surgery was 12 (4-47) days, and the mean critical care stay was 3.2 (0-23) days.
Seven patients required tracheostomy; meningitis developed in 3 patients; liquorrhea occurred in 2 cases.
Ventriculoperitoneal shunting was used in 8 (13.8%) cases.
One (1.7%) patient died in the early postoperative period.
CONCLUSION
Our results demonstrate that resection of recurrent malignant neuroepithelial tumors in children can be performed with high radicalness (90%) and acceptable risks.
