[The differential algorithm for the prescription of the stabilizing training to the patients following replacement arthroplasty of the lower extremities].  BACKGROUND
The biological feedback-based stability (balance) training is used for the rehabilitation of the patients following replacement arthroplasty of the lower extremities with the purpose of restoration of their postural balance.
AIM
The objective of the present study was to develop a differential algorithm for the prescription of the stability training to the patients after they had undergone the endoprosthetic replacement of the joints of the lower extremities.
MATERIAL AND METHODS  The study included 48 patients presenting with the following nosological forms: hip arthrosis with total replacement arthroplasty and gonarthrosis with total replacement arthroplasty.
All the patients underwent the biofeedback-based stability training with the use of the dynamic balance Pro-Kin system ('Technobody', Italy) using the 'Skiing' No.  10 computer game during 20 minutes every day.
The clinical and instrumental methods were employed for the purpose.
RESULTS  The rehabilitation subgroups of the patients who had undergone the were distinguished for the first time based on the identification of the main risk factors.
It was shown that the main factors having the most pronounced influence on the recovery of postural balance under the conditions of stability training with biological feedback include the age, the time after surgery, the results of evaluation using the Spielberger-Hanin anxiety scale and the Bek depression scale, the level of co-morbidity, the risk of falling estimated from the Morse-Fall scale, and the results of the digit-symbol test based on the Wegsler intelligence scale.
CONCLUSION
The distinguishing between rehabilitation subgroups allowed to develop the differentiated algorithm for the prescription of the stability training with biological feedback for the purpose of restoration of the patients' postural balance following total replacement arthroplasty of the lower extremities.
