[The experience with the organization of the health resort-based treatment of the children under conditions of a megapolis.  The present and the future of the service].
The Moscow Health Department organized an efficient and comprehensive three-level system of medical rehabilitation for the children.  Health resort-based treatment is normatively a component of the third stage of rehabilitation.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to substantiate the necessity and validity of the health resort-based treatment as an integral part of the third stage of medical rehabilitation.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
We have carried out the analysis of activities of 16 health resorts facilities during the period from 2016 to 2017 that included the evaluation in volume terms of the medical assistance, availability of the health resort-based treatment, and its clinical outcomes.
The data thus obtained were systematized and processed with the use of the MS Office software package.
RESULTS
The analysis of dynamics of the extent of the provided medical assistance expressed in terms of volume has demonstrated the increase in the overall number of people who had received health resort-based treatment in 2017 in comparison with that in 2016.
The analysis of the structure of the pathological conditions in the patients admitted for the treatment in the health resort settings revealed correlation with the profiles of specialization of these facilities and with the structure of newly registered diseases.
The analysis of the services rendered within the framework of the health resort-based treatment programs confirmed the effectiveness of medical assistance organized with the use of such approach.
The study revealed challenges still facing the services responsible for the provision of the health resort-based treatment of the children in Moscow and the lines of activities in this field to be carried out in the near future.
CONCLUSION
The experience gained by the Moscow public healthcare organizations gives evidence that the health resort facilities located directly in the region are necessary for rendering the comprehensive three-level medical rehabilitation as a very important component of its third (final).
