[The evaluation of the effectiveness of cardiac rehabilitation of the patients after percutaneous coronary interventions].
BACKGROUND  Notwithstanding the current abundance of the methodological approaches to the evaluation of the outcomes of medical rehabilitation, the criteria for the effectiveness of the combined influence of the curative physical factors are still inadequate and remain at variance with the principles of evidence-based medicine.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to develop a method for the evaluation of the effectiveness of the rehabilitation activities in the patients presenting with the acute coronary syndrome following endovascular cardiac interventions.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
This work is based on the results of a prospective single-center cohort-based clinical study involving the subjects who had undergone myocardial infarction following endovascular cardiac surgical interventions.
The duration of the patient's participation in the study was 21 days.
RESULTS
We have developed the integrative approach to the creation of the unified multi-criteria system for the evaluation of the effectiveness of the treatment of the patients presenting with cardiovascular diseases after percutaneous coronary interventions (PCI).  In addition, the step-by-step description of this technology is presented.
The algorithm for the calculation of the integrated health index and the evaluation of the overall effect of the rehabilitation activities was proposed based on the assessment of the clinical, laboratory, and functional indicators of the health status together with the psychological characteristics of individual patients.
It is proposed to consider an integrated health index as a parameter for estimating the rehabilitation potential of the patients suffering from cardiovascular diseases after percutaneous surgical interventions.
CONCLUSION
The proposed system for the evaluating of the effectiveness of comprehensive medical rehabilitation differs from analogous intellectual products in that it excludes the subjective interpretation of the severity of clinical symptoms associated with the concrete pathological process and makes impossible the arbitrary determination of the weight of the peculiar features of the patient's condition.  Moreover, it allows to reduce the parameters of different types chosen as the criteria for the evaluation of the effectiveness of rehabilitation to the standardized values, to obtain an unambiguous numerical expression of the results of the rehabilitative treatment, and to compare the outcomes of the rehabilitation activities based at different treatment and prevention settings.
