[Innovative technology full volume lavage of the nasal cavity in the treatment of allergic and vasomotor rhinitis].  Viewed 60 men and women (mean age 26.2±2.4 years) with rhinitis, including: 30 people (18 women and 12 men) 20-45 years with verified diagnoses of persistent allergic rhinitis and 30 patients (16 males and 14 females) 18-35 years (mean age 22.5±1.7 years) - neurovegetative form of chronic vasomotor rhinitis in the phase of exacerbation, receiving basic therapy with antihistamines of the II generation, stabilizers of membranes of mast cells and decongestants, divided by random sampling into 4 groups: 1A (20 patients with allergic rhinitis) and 2A (20 patients with vasomotor rhinitis) were received within 30 days in addition to the basic therapy of the nasal cavity washing procedure with the device Dolphin; in the groups 1B (10 patients with allergic rhinitis) and 2B (10 patients with vasomotor rhinitis) only basic treatment was carried out.
By the end of the treatment course, the severity of the symptom 'difficulty in nasal breathing' in patients in groups 1A and 2A, decreased 2.6 times and met the criterion of 'minor violation', while in groups 1B-decreased only 1.3 times, and in 2B-changes were not significant and corresponded to 'moderate violation'.
Manifestations of rhinorrhea after therapy decreased in the group of 1A 2.0 times, and in the group of 2A 1.7 times, which was regarded as' a slight manifestation of the symptom', whereas in the groups of 1B and 2B only a tendency to improve was revealed.
At the end of the follow - up period, the severity of the symptom 'sneezing' decreased in patients in group 1A by 4.0 times, in group 2A-3.3 times and corresponded to 'no disturbance', while in groups 1B and 2B changes were less than 3.0 and 2.7 times respectively.
At the end of the treatment course in patients in groups 1A sense of smell was restored in the group 2A -the degree of severity of olfaction decreased 3.0 times, while in the group of 1B-only 1.2 times, and in the group of 2B-has not changed.
According to the visual analog scale (VAS), on the background of treatment optimized by nasal lavage with the device Dolphin complex, the greatest decrease in the degree of violations of household activity was revealed in patients with allergic rhinitis - 2.9 times.
After treatment, the effect of rhinitis symptoms on sleep disturbance decreased in groups 1A and 2A 1.9 times, while in groups 1B and 2B - only 1.3 times.
The use of nasal lavage with device Dolphin complex in the treatment of allergic and vasomotor rhinitis contributed to a decrease in the frequency of use of intranasal vasoconstrictive drugs by the 10th day of observation by 1.8 and 1.6 times, respectively, and by the 15th day-by 2.3 and 2.4 times, respectively.
In the groups of standard treatment (1B and 2B) revealed a significant reduction in the frequency of decongestants was observed only after 15 days of treatment.
Thus, the inclusion of a full volumetric nasal lavage with the device Dolphin complex in the treatment of patients with persistent allergic and neurovegetative form of chronic vasomotor rhinitis contributes to the reduction of clinical simtomatics, reduces the severity of violations of everyday life and the frequency of decongestants, improves night sleep of patients.
