[The role of the combined balneotherapeutic treatment as the 'add-back therapy' against the background of the anti-hormonal effects of the agonists of gonadotropin-releasing hormone in the women suffering from endometriosis genitalis externa].  BACKGROUND
The use of agonists of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) for the rehabilitation treatment of the patients presenting with endometriosis genitalis externa is known to significantly enhance the risk of development of hypoestrogenism.  The so-called 'add-back-therapy' is carried out as a preventive measure to eliminate hypoestrogenism caused by the intake of GnRH agonists without detriment to the effectiveness of anti-hormonal therapy.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to estimate the effectiveness of the new method ('add-back hormone replacement therapy') in comparison with anti-hormonal therapy with the use of GRH agonists at the stage of the early postoperative medical rehabilitation based on the drinking of mineral waters (MW) and radon therapy (RT) in the patients who had undergone the laparoscopic interventions for the treatment of endometrioid heterotopies of the ovaries (1-3 months post-operatively).
MATERIAL AND METHODS
To evaluate the effectiveness of the spa and health resort-based rehabilitation measures, the long-term effects of GnRH agonists have been studied in 2 groups of the patients formed by the of simple randomization method.
The main group (MG) was comprised of 45 women received medical rehabilitation under conditions of a spa and health resort setting with the application of medium-salt water from the Pyatigorsk spring and radon therapy in the combination with triptorelin.
The group of comparison (CG) was composed of 44 women given the treatment with the use of triptorelin under the out-patient conditions.
The assessment of the results of the study included: the estimation of the intensity of pelvic pain syndrome, indicators of the hormonal status and the quality of life (QL), ultrasonic examination of the pelvic organs, and the occurrence of adverse effects of triptorelin.
The duration of the study was 3 years (2014-2016).
RESULTS
The analysis of the long-term results of the rehabilitative treatment has demonstrated that the rehabilitation activities under the spa and health resort conditions within 1-3 months after the surgical intervention including the application of MW and RT in the combination with an agonist of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (triptorelin) greatly contributed to the stability of the results of the treatment: specifically, only 2.5% of the patients suffered the recurrence of cystic ovarian endometriosis whereas 24.5% (p<0.001) reported the restoration of the reproductive function.
The patients comprising the control group experienced the recurrence of the pathologic process in 7.5% of the cases and the restoration of the reproductive function in 15.8% of the cases (p<0.001).
Simultaneously, the quality of life in the patients in the main group improved 3.4 times on the average in comparison with the initial level (p<0.001).
The 2.2-fold improvement of the quality of life was documented in the control patients (p<0.001).  At the same time, the frequency of adverse reactions to the treatment with triptorelin in the control patients was higher than in the main group including pain in the epigastric area, headache, irritability, hyperhidrosis, and instability of arterial blood pressure (ABP) that significantly deteriorated the life quality in these women.
CONCLUSION
The comparative analysis of the results of the follow-up observations has demonstrated that the application of drinking mineral water and radon therapy for the treatment of the women suffering from endometriosis genitalis externa can be recommended as 'add-back therapy' against the background of anti-hormonal effects of agonists of gonadotropin-releasing hormone.
