[The complex correction of the pathophysiological disorders in the patients presenting with orthopedic and traumatological problems with the application of the electromagnetic waves of the terahertz range at the radiation frequencies of nitric oxide].
Experimental and clinical studies have shown that a skeletal trauma causes a whole complex of pathophysiological disorders, both local and systemic.  The main factors determining the severity of the trauma, as well as the nature of the course of the post-traumatic period, are the degree of hypoxia (acidosis), hypercoagulation and immune disorders.
To influence these pathophysiological disorders in the patients presenting the with skeletal traumas, various approaches have been proposed, including the use of antihypoxants and antioxidants, the methods and means for the stimulation and support of the immune system, medications to regulate hemostasis.
According to the literature publications, terahertz-frequency therapy is presently regarded as a promising method the minimally invasive interference in the metabolic processes proceeding in the tissues of the musculoskeletal system.
The analysis of the literature data and clinical observations indicate that electromagnetic waves of the terahertz range are efficient in the treatment of many chronic diseases when applied both as monotherapy and in combination with other physical methods and medications strengthening and consolidating the therapeutic effect of the latter.  The electromagnetic waves of the terahertz range are currently used in medicine as a biophysical factor for the correction of the microcirculatory disorders.
It has been shown that the use of these waves for the combined restorative treatment of the patients suffering fractures of the limb bones not only improves the dynamics of fracture consolidation symptoms but also contributes to the prevention of posttraumatic complications (thrombosis, ossification of soft tissues).
However, the experience with the application of the electromagnetic waves of the terahertz range waves in clinical traumatology and orthopedics is rather modest.  The analysis of the results of fundamental research and experience with the application of electromagnetic waves in the terahertz range has shown that the systemic effects produced by the waves of this range promote the correction of such pathophysiological disorders as hypoxia, hypercoagulation, and impaired immunity.
Given that these disorders develop during the post-traumatic period in the patients presenting with severe multiple and combined traumas, it can be assumed that the use of electromagnetic waves of the terahertz range for the the combined treatment of these patients provides a very promising tool for the stimulation of the reparative processes especially bearing in mind that the first results described in the literature, look quite optimistic.
The investigation into the mechanisms regulating the regenerative capacity of connective tissue, the creation of the scientifically-sound foundations for its management with the help of the modern electronics devices is a promising task for the developers of the new biomedical technologies.
