[The use of the osteopathic correction for the combined treatment and rehabilitation of the patients presenting with the vertebral artery syndrome].  BACKGROUND
The pathological changes in the cervical spine frequently result in the disturbances of the blood supply in the vertebral-basiliar system.  The degenerative-dystrophic processes in the cervical spine occupy the leading place in the pathogenesis of the vertebral artery syndrome (VAS) causing disorders of the microcirculation and innervation, as well as the restriction of mobility and the development of somatic dysfunctions.
It can be assumed that the manual methods applied to manage this condition can be effective in the removal the functional abnormalities in the blood flow.  AIMS
The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the osteopathic treatment as a component of combined therapy of the patients presenting with the vertebral artery syndrome.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
This experimental prospective controlled randomized study was conducted during the period from January 2015 till January 2017.
A total of 106 patients with VAS, aged from 20 to 60 (the average age was 43.1±1.0 years) took part in the study.  The patients were divided into three groups.
The experimental group was comprised of 40 patients who received the medicamentous and osteopathic treatment.  The control group consisted of 40 patients given the medicamentous treatment alone.
The group of comparison contained 26 patients treated with the use of pharmacotherapy and massage.  The methods finding application in clinical neurology, clinical osteopathy, and ultrasonic diagnostics of the brachiocephalic vessels were employed to evaluate the health status of the patients and evaluate the effectiveness of their treatment.
RESULTS
The combined treatment of the patients comprising the experimental group with the use of osteopathic correction and pharmacotherapy produced the positive effect and resulted in the normalization of the neurological status of the patients; specifically, the incidence of both subjective and objective (neurological) symptoms was reduced.
Simultaneously, the incidence of somatic dysfunctions at all levels of their manifestation decreased as compared with their frequency in the patients of the control and comparison groups.
The results of the ultrasound examination of the great vessels of the neck and the brain in the experimental group made possible the evaluation of the dynamics in the incidence of the major pathological changes in the vessels of the vertebral-basiliar basin (VBB).
It was shown that the occurrence of such serious changes as venous dishemia, reduction of the vasoconstriction and vasodilation reserves in VBB, in the patients of the experimental group vessels fell down by 32.1% (p<0.001), in comparison with only 12% (p<0.05), in the control group and 6,27% in the group of comparison (p>0.05).
CONCLUSION
The osteopathic manipulative treatment included in the combined therapy of patients with VAS based on the personified approach to the management of individual cases, detection and correction of each clinically significant functional disorder accompanying the pathological process greatly contributes to the regression of the neurological symptoms, elimination of somatic dysfunctions at different levels of the body, normalization of the blood flow in the vessels of the vertebral-basilar system.
Taken together, these effects prolong the beneficial results of the combined rehabilitative treatment of the patients with the vertebral artery syndrome based on the application of standard pharmacotherapy and correction of the functional disorders with the use of the osteopathic methods.
