[The substantiation of the application of the high-intensity pulsed magnetic field for the combined treatment of biliary sludge].  Despite the considerable achievements in the field of gastroenterology, there is still high incidence of diseases of the organs of the hepatobiliary system which necessitates the development of new therapeutic techniques for their management.
Nowadays, high-intensity pulsed magnetic therapy is considered to be a highly efficacious method characterized by well-pronounced and many-sided action on the processes proceeding in the organism as a new preformed factor producing neurostimulatory, vasodilatory, trophic, and hypoalgesic effects.  It appears to be effective with respect to biliary sludge (BS) since it can promote depletion of stagnant contents of the gall bladder and also intensify its contractile function.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the effectiveness of the application of the high-intensity pulsed magnetic field in the combination with the intake of mineral water (MW) and rational pharmacotherapy as the components of the combined treatment of biliary sludge.
METHODS
The study included 117 patients presenting with biliary sludge (BS) who were randomly allocated to three groups.
Group 1 was comprised of 38 patients and served as the control group.  These patients received medicamentous therapy (hymecromone - 200 mg 3 times daily during two weeks and ursodeoxycholic acid at a dose of 10-15 mg/kg a day during a period from 3 to 6 months).
The second group consisted of 40 patients and served as the group of comparison.  The patients of this group received medicamentous therapy in the combination with the intake of 'Sernovodskaya' hydrocarbonate-chloride-sulphate sodium mineral water (from a spring in the Chechen republic).
The third group was composed of 39 patients and constituted the main study group.  These patients completed a course of therapy with the use of the high-intensity pulsed magnetic field applied to the gall bladder region.
Each patient underwent 10 sessions of magnetic therapy after the completion of the treatment with hymecromone and 'Sernovodskaya' mineral water.  The treatment was carried out with simultaneous monitoring dynamics of the clinical symptoms of biliary sludge, the ultrasound examination of the abdominal organs with the evaluation of the contractile function of the gall bladder, the level of bilirubin in the cystic bile, bile acids, cholesterol, and cholate-cholesteric coefficient.
The combined treatment of the patients suffering from BS including the application of the high-intensity pulsed magnetic field alleviated the clinical symptoms of the disease much faster than medicamentous therapy combined with the intake of 'Sernovodskaya' mineral water.  Moreover, it promoted the restoration of the motor activity of the gall bladder and accelerated the evacuation of the hyperechoic particles.
CONCLUSION  The course of the combined treatment of the patients presenting with biliary sludge including the application of the high-intensity pulsed magnetic field in the combination with the intake of mineral water (MW) and rational pharmacotherapy significantly relieved abdominal pains, alleviated the symptoms of biliary dyspepsia, and improved the motor function of the biliary tract.
These therapeutic effects persisted as long as 3 months.  The results of the present study give evidence of the necessity of prescription of an optimum dose of ursodeoxycholic acid to the patients suffering from biliary sludge.
