[The application of bioresonance therapy for the correction of the overtrained athlete syndrome].  BACKGROUND
Physical overload results in the development of pathological changes in the organs and systems and thereby causes their dysfunction.  This leads to disadaptation, vegetative imbalance, and disturbances in the cardiovascular, nervous, endocrine and other systems.
Taken together, these changes give rise to a syndrome of overtraining.  In this context, the pathogenetically sound method of therapy appears to be the most suitable for the management of this condition based on the physiotherapeutic non-invasive interventions for the correction of physiological characteristics and the psycho-emotional status of the patients.
AIM  The objective of the present study was to evaluate the influence of bioresonance therapy (BRT) on the health status of the athletes presenting with the overtraining syndrome.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
The study included 60 athletes presenting with the overtraining syndrome.  They were divided into two groups each comprised of 30 subjects of comparable age, sex, sport, and sports qualification.
Group I was composed of 30 athletes who were treated by means of bioresonance therapy.  Group II (control) contained the athletes who received placebo procedures (i.e. the procedures with the use of a non-functioning device).
All the athletes were examined before and after the treatment with the application of the clinical and instrumental methods.
RESULTS
The study has demonstrated that the use of bioresonance therapy significantly increases the parasympathetic influence on the rhythm of the heart, reduces the stress on the central contour of its regulation, contributes to the 'economization' of the cardiac activity; has an antihypertensive effect (more pronounced with respect to systolic blood pressure (SBP)), has a normalizing effect on the variability of blood pressure (BP) in the patients with initial BP instability, and significantly decreases the time index in connection with monitoring blood pressure; moreover, BRT has a normalizing effect on the circadian rhythm of BP and corrects the rate of the morning rise in diastolic blood pressure (DBP).
CONCLUSION
Bioresonance therapy can be considered as a method for the correction of the syndrome of overtraining in the athletes with the enhanced activity of the sympathetic nervous system.
