[Prevention of cognitive dysfunction in elderly cancer patients operated on the pelvic organs in conditions of multimodal anesthesia].  The aim of the study was to evaluate the impact of various variants of multimodal anesthesia on the cognitive functions of elderly patients after surgical interventions on pelvic organs, the development of preventive measures for POCD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS
A study was conducted in 76 elderly patients aged 62 to 84 years with an increased risk of developing POCD.  Of these, 46 women and 30 men.
Patients were divided into two groups, depending on the type of anesthesia.
The 1st group consisted of 37 patients who had low-flow anesthesia with sevoflurane combined with epidural analgesia.  2nd - 39 patients who had anticipated multimodal analgesia on the basis of systemic administration of lidocaine, sulphate magnesia, verapamil.
In each group, patients are divided into subgroups - the main (O) and control (K).
In the main subgroups anesthetics were supplemented with 20 ml.  Cytoflavin, administered 20-25 minutes before the end of surgery and on the 1-3 days of the perioperative period.
Cognitive functions were assessed by standardized scales: Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), Montreal Cognitive Evaluation Scale (MoCA), Frontal Assessment Batteries (FAB).
The level of anxiety and depression was determined by the hospital scale of anxiety and depression (HADS).
RESULTS
At oncological patients of advanced age in 52.5% of cases there is a moderate degree of cognitive impairment.
In the perioperative period, in the study groups, when using different variants of multimodal anesthesia, there is an equivalent transient decrease in cognitive functions by 12.5 and 12.8%.
The use of cytoflavin can reduce the manifestation of POCD from 1-day perioperative period, improve the cognitive status of patients.
CONCLUSION
In cancer patients of advanced age, cognitive impairment is observed, aggravated after surgical treatment, regardless of the variant of multimodal anesthesia.
Protection by Cytoflavin allows to restore the cognitive functions of elderly cancer patients, reduce the manifestations of POCD.
